Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management
Overview
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing acute heart failure or possible acute heart
failure in people aged 18 and over. It aims to improve the immediate care of someone who
is acutely unwell as a result of heart failure.
Heart failure may indicate acute myocardial injury in patients with COVID-19. See the
recommendations on diagnosing and managing acute myocardial injury in our COVID-19
rapid guideline on managing COVID-19.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners
• Adults who have a diagnosis of acute heart failure, or have possible acute heart
failure, or are being investigated for acute heart failure

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
Introduction
Heart failure is a condition in which the heart does not pump enough blood to meet all the
needs of the body. It is caused by dysfunction of the heart due to muscle damage
(systolic or diastolic dysfunction), valvular dysfunction, arrhythmias or other rare causes.
Acute heart failure can present as new-onset heart failure in people without known cardiac
dysfunction, or as acute decompensation of chronic heart failure.
Acute heart failure is a common cause of admission to hospital (over 67,000 admissions in
England and Wales per year) and is the leading cause of hospital admission in people
65 years or older in the UK.
This guideline includes important aspects of the diagnosis and management of acute heart
failure that are not addressed by the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure. The guideline
on chronic heart failure focuses on long-term management rather than on the immediate
care of someone who is acutely unwell as a result of heart failure.
This guideline covers the care of adults (aged 18 years or older) who have a diagnosis of
acute heart failure, have possible acute heart failure, or are being investigated for acute
heart failure. It includes the following key clinical areas:
• the role of early natriuretic peptide testing and echocardiography
• the role of specialist management units
• the use of ventilatory support, pharmacological therapy and ultrafiltration
• treatment after stabilisation, including selected surgical interventions and initiation of
the pharmacological therapies that are used in the management of chronic heart
failure.
Drug recommendations
The guideline will assume that prescribers will use a drug's summary of product
characteristics to inform decisions made with individual patients.

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
In memory of Christopher Jones, patient member of the GDG who ensured that the
patient voice was heard during the development of this guideline.

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
Key priorities for implementation
The following recommendations have been identified as priorities for implementation. See
the full list of recommendations.
Organisation of care
• All hospitals admitting people with suspected acute heart failure should provide a
specialist heart failure team that is based on a cardiology ward and provides outreach
services.
• Ensure that all people being admitted to hospital with suspected acute heart failure
have early and continuing input from a dedicated specialist heart failure team.
Diagnosis, assessment and monitoring
• In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure, use a single
measurement of serum natriuretic peptides (B-type natriuretic peptide [BNP] or
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP]) and the following thresholds
to rule out the diagnosis of heart failure.
－ BNP less than 100 ng/litre
－ NT-proBNP less than 300 ng/litre.
• In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure with raised natriuretic
peptide levels (see recommendation 1.2.2), perform transthoracic Doppler 2D
echocardiography to establish the presence or absence of cardiac abnormalities.
• In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure, consider performing
transthoracic Doppler 2D echocardiography within 48 hours of admission to guide
early specialist management.
Treatment after stabilisation
• In a person presenting with acute heart failure who is already taking beta-blockers,
continue the beta-blocker treatment unless they have a heart rate less than 50 beats

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
per minute, second or third degree atrioventricular block, or shock.
• Start or restart beta-blocker treatment during hospital admission in people with acute
heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction, once their condition has been
stabilised – for example, when intravenous diuretics are no longer needed.
• Ensure that the person's condition is stable for typically 48 hours after starting or
restarting beta-blockers and before discharging from hospital.
• Offer an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (or angiotensin receptor blocker if
there are intolerable side effects) and an aldosterone antagonist during hospital
admission to people with acute heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction. If the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (or angiotensin receptor
blocker) is not tolerated an aldosterone antagonist should still be offered.

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
The following guidance is based on the best available evidence. The full guideline gives
details of the methods and the evidence used to develop the guidance.
1.1 Organisation of care
1.1.1 All hospitals admitting people with suspected acute heart failure should provide a
specialist heart failure team that is based on a cardiology ward and provides
outreach services.
1.1.2 Ensure that all people being admitted to hospital with suspected acute heart
failure have early and continuing input from a dedicated specialist heart failure
team.
1.1.3 Plan the following with people with acute heart failure in line with the NICE
guideline on chronic heart failure:
• discharge from hospital after the acute phase and
• subsequent management in primary care, including ongoing monitoring and
care provided by the multidisciplinary team and
• information and communication about their condition, its treatment and
prognosis.

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
1.1.4 A follow-up clinical assessment should be undertaken by a member of the
specialist heart failure team within 2 weeks of the person being discharged from
hospital.
1.2 Diagnosis, assessment and monitoring
1.2.1 Take a history, perform a clinical examination and undertake standard
investigations – for example, electrocardiography, chest X-ray and blood tests – in
line with the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure.
1.2.2 In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure, use a single
measurement of serum natriuretic peptides (B-type natriuretic peptide [BNP] or
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP]) and the following
thresholds to rule out the diagnosis of heart failure:
• BNP less than 100 ng/litre
• NT-proBNP less than 300 ng/litre.
1.2.3 In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure with raised
natriuretic peptide levels (see recommendation 1.2.2), perform transthoracic
Doppler 2D echocardiography to establish the presence or absence of cardiac
abnormalities.
1.2.4 In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure, consider performing
transthoracic Doppler 2D echocardiography within 48 hours of admission to
guide early specialist management.
1.2.5 Do not routinely offer pulmonary artery catheterisation to people with acute heart
failure.
1.3 Initial pharmacological treatment
1.3.1 For guidance on patient consent and capacity follow recommendations on
consent and capacity in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
services.
1.3.2 Do not routinely offer opiates to people with acute heart failure.
1.3.3 Offer intravenous diuretic therapy to people with acute heart failure. Start
treatment using either a bolus or infusion strategy.
1.3.4 For people already taking a diuretic, consider a higher dose of diuretic than that
on which the person was admitted unless there are serious concerns with patient
adherence to diuretic therapy before admission.
1.3.5 Closely monitor the person's renal function, weight and urine output during
diuretic therapy.
1.3.6 Discuss with the person the best strategies of coping with an increased urine
output.
1.3.7 Do not routinely offer nitrates to people with acute heart failure.
1.3.8 If intravenous nitrates are used in specific circumstances, such as for people with
concomitant myocardial ischaemia, severe hypertension or regurgitant aortic or
mitral valve disease, monitor blood pressure closely in a setting where at least
level 2 care can be provided.
1.3.9 Do not offer sodium nitroprusside to people with acute heart failure.
1.3.10 Do not routinely offer inotropes or vasopressors to people with acute heart
failure.
1.3.11 Consider inotropes or vasopressors in people with acute heart failure with
potentially reversible cardiogenic shock. Administer these treatments in a cardiac
care unit or high dependency unit or an alternative setting where at least level 2
care can be provided.
Level 2 care is for people needing more detailed observation or intervention,
including support for a single failing organ system or postoperative care and for
those stepping down from higher levels of care. From levels of critical care for

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
adult patients.
1.4 Initial non-pharmacological treatment
1.4.1 Do not routinely use non-invasive ventilation (continuous positive airways
pressure [CPAP] or non-invasive positive pressure ventilation [NIPPV]) in people
with acute heart failure and cardiogenic pulmonary oedema.
1.4.2 If a person has cardiogenic pulmonary oedema with severe dyspnoea and
acidaemia consider starting non-invasive ventilation without delay:
• at acute presentation or
• as an adjunct to medical therapy if the person's condition has failed to
respond.
1.4.3 Consider invasive ventilation in people with acute heart failure that, despite
treatment, is leading to or is complicated by:
• respiratory failure or
• reduced consciousness or physical exhaustion.
1.4.4 Do not routinely offer ultrafiltration to people with acute heart failure.
1.4.5 Consider ultrafiltration for people with confirmed diuretic resistance.
Diuretic resistance is defined as dose escalation beyond a person's previously
recognised dose ceiling or a dose approaching the maximum recommended daily
dose without incremental improvement in diuresis. From diuretics and
ultrafiltration in acute decompensated heart failure.
1.5 Treatment after stabilisation
1.5.1 In a person presenting with acute heart failure who is already taking
beta-blockers, continue the beta-blocker treatment unless they have a heart rate

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
less than 50 beats per minute, second or third degree atrioventricular block, or
shock.
1.5.2 Start or restart beta-blocker treatment during hospital admission in people with
acute heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction, once their
condition has been stabilised – for example, when intravenous diuretics are no
longer needed.
1.5.3 Ensure that the person's condition is stable for typically 48 hours after starting or
restarting beta-blockers and before discharging from hospital.
1.5.4 Offer an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (or angiotensin receptor blocker
if there are intolerable side effects) and an aldosterone antagonist during hospital
admission to people with acute heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction. If the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (or angiotensin receptor
blocker) is not tolerated an aldosterone antagonist should still be offered.
In February 2016, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) published advice on the concomitant use of spironolactone and renin-
angiotensin system drugs in heart failure concerning the risk of potentially fatal
hyperkalaemia. See the MHRA advice for more information.
1.5.5 Closely monitor the person's renal function, electrolytes, heart rate, blood
pressure and overall clinical status during treatment with beta-blockers,
aldosterone antagonists or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
1.6 Valvular surgery and percutaneous intervention
The recommendations on valvular surgery and percutaneous intervention have been
replaced by the NICE guideline on heart valve disease.
1.7 Mechanical assist devices
1.7.1 At an early stage, the specialist should have a discussion with a centre providing
mechanical circulatory support about:

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
• people with potentially reversible severe acute heart failure or
• people who are potential candidates for transplantation.

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
Recommendations for research
The Guideline Development Group has made the following recommendations for research,
based on its review of evidence, to improve NICE guidance and patient care in the future.
1 Dopamine
In people with acute heart failure, congestion and worsening renal function, does the
addition of low-dose dopamine to standard therapy lead to greater diuresis and renal
protection compared with adding placebo to standard therapy?
Why this is important
A randomised controlled trial should be conducted to investigate whether the addition of
low-dose dopamine to standard therapy leads to more clinically and cost effective
decongestion in people admitted to hospital for treatment of decompensated heart failure.
The study should aim to investigate the diuretic effect of dopamine as well as effects on
renal function.
One of the most common and difficult to manage problems arising during the initial
treatment of people with acute heart failure is an inadequate response to intravenous
diuretic therapy (that is, failure to relieve congestion), which is often associated with
worsening renal function. This combination frequently leads to a prolonged inpatient stay
and is associated with higher inpatient mortality rates and higher post-discharge mortality
and re-admission rates. The best treatment for this combination of problems is unknown.
However, theoretical and experimental evidence indicates that low-dose dopamine may
improve renal blood flow, as well as enhance sodium and water excretion. Clinical trials
have not yet resolved whether in some patients, the use of low-dose dopamine actually
results in improved decongestion and shorter hospital stays.
2 Thiazide
In people with acute heart failure and persistent congestion, does the addition of a
thiazide diuretic to standard therapy lead to greater diuresis compared with adding
placebo to standard therapy?

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
Why this is important
A randomised controlled trial should be conducted to investigate whether the addition of a
thiazide diuretic to standard therapy leads to more clinically and cost effective
decongestion in people admitted to hospital for treatment of decompensated heart failure.
One of the most common and difficult to manage problems arising during the initial
treatment of people with acute heart failure is an inadequate response to intravenous
diuretic therapy. This frequently leads to a prolonged inpatient stay and is associated with
higher inpatient mortality and higher post-discharge mortality and re-admission rates. The
best treatment for this problem is unknown. However, there is some inconsistent and
non-robust evidence that addition of a thiazide or thiazide-like diuretic (metolazone) may
be beneficial. The proposed study would aim to resolve this uncertainty and guide the
management of a difficult clinical problem.
3 Intra-aortic balloon counter-pulsation
In people with acute heart failure and hypoperfusion syndrome, is the use of intra-aortic
balloon counter-pulsation pump (IABP) better than the use of intravenous inotropes?
Why this is important
A randomised controlled trial should be conducted in people with decompensated heart
failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction and systemic hypoperfusion comparing
the use of IABP with the use of inotropes/vasopressors. This would determine which
strategy is more clinically and cost effective in this cohort.
IABP is used in the hospital setting as an adjuvant in people with critical coronary
ischaemia and in people with mechanical complications of acute myocardial infarction. It
has also been used in people who develop cardiogenic shock after acute myocardial
infarction. However, it is uncertain whether it can provide clinical benefit in the critically
unwell patients with acute heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction and
systemic hypoperfusion.
4 Ultrafiltration
In people with decompensated heart failure, fluid congestion and diuretic resistance, does

Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (CG187)
ultrafiltration lead to more rapid and effective decongestion compared with continuing
diuretic treatment?
Why this is important
A randomised controlled trial should be undertaken to determine whether ultrafiltration is
more clinically and cost effective than conventional diuretic therapy for people admitted to
hospital with decompensated heart failure. The study should not only investigate several
clinical outcomes but also consider the impact of treatments on quality of life and provide
data on safety.
People who have fluid retention that is resistant to conventional diuretic therapy, with or
without renal dysfunction, make up a high proportion of hospital admissions due to heart
failure. Such admissions are often prolonged and therefore have important budgetary
implications for the NHS. The few, relatively small scale, randomised trials of ultrafiltration
performed so far have been conducted in healthcare settings very different from the UK,
with less fluid retention than is usually seen in UK practice, and where length of stay is
usually much shorter than in UK (and European) practice. Although technically feasible, the
evidence for benefit on heart failure outcomes is inconsistent and difficult to generalise to
UK practice. Therefore, a UK-based study of sufficient quality is needed.