Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke
1 Recommendations
1.1 Alteplase is recommended within its marketing authorisation for treating acute
ischaemic stroke in adults if:
• treatment is started as early as possible within 4.5 hours of onset of stroke
symptoms, and
• intracranial haemorrhage has been excluded by appropriate imaging
techniques.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
2 The technology
2.1 Alteplase (Actilyse, Boehringer Ingelheim) is a tissue plasminogen activator
manufactured by recombinant DNA technology. It activates the production of
plasmin from its precursor plasminogen. Plasmin is an enzyme that degrades
fibrin clots. The aim of treatment is to reduce the impact of ischaemia by
restoring blood flow through the occluded (blocked) artery. A UK marketing
authorisation for alteplase to treat acute ischaemic stroke within 3 hours of the
onset of symptoms was granted in September 2002. On 14 March 2012, the
manufacturer received approval from the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency extending the use of alteplase to within 4.5 hours of the onset
of symptoms. The current marketing authorisation states that treatment must be
started as early as possible within 4.5 hours after onset of stroke symptoms and
after exclusion of intracranial haemorrhage by appropriate imaging techniques.
2.2 The summary of product characteristics lists the following adverse reactions for
alteplase: haemorrhage (intracranial and gastrointestinal), recurrent ischaemia or
angina, hypotension, heart failure, pulmonary oedema and reperfusion
arrhythmias. For full details of adverse reactions and contraindications, see the
summary of product characteristics.
2.3 The cost of alteplase is £135 per 10-mg pack, £180 per 20-mg pack and £300
per 50-mg pack (excluding VAT; BNF edition 63). The cost per course of
treatment depends on the body weight of the patient, and can range from £300
to £600 based on a recommended dose of 0.9 mg per kilogram of body weight.
Costs may vary in different settings because of negotiated procurement
discounts.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
3 The manufacturer's submission
3.1 The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by the manufacturer of
alteplase and a review of this submission by the Evidence Review Group (ERG).
The decision problem addressed by the manufacturer considered whether
treatment with alteplase was clinically effective compared with standard medical
care (standard medical and supportive management that does not include
alteplase) for treating acute ischaemic stroke in adults within 4.5 hours of
symptom onset, and whether alteplase treatment was a cost-effective use of
NHS resources.
3.2 The manufacturer carried out a systematic literature search, which was based on
a previously published Cochrane review ('Thrombolysis for acute ischaemic
stroke'), but restricted the search to randomised controlled trials of alteplase. For
the 0- to 3-hour treatment window, the manufacturer identified no trials other
than those included in NICE's previous technology appraisal guidance on
alteplase for the treatment of ischaemic stroke from 2007. The trials included
NINDS (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke) 1 and 2,
ATLANTIS ('Thrombolysis for acute noninterventional therapy in ischaemic
stroke') A and B, and ECASS (the 'European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study') 2.
All these trials were multicentre, double-blinded, placebo-controlled randomised
controlled trials of alteplase administered at its licensed dose of 0.9 mg/kg.
Treatment with alteplase was administered within 3 hours (NINDS 1 and 2),
5 hours (ATLANTIS B) or 6 hours (ATLANTIS A, ECASS 2) of onset of stroke
symptoms. Patients were followed up for outcomes for 90 days. The NINDS and
ATLANTIS trials were conducted in North America and the ECASS trial in multiple
sites in Europe (including the UK), Australia and New Zealand.
3.3 The clinical-effectiveness evidence in the manufacturer's submission focused on
the extended 3- to 4.5-hour treatment window for which the only directly
relevant trial identified by the manufacturer was ECASS 3. Other trials with data
indirectly relevant to this treatment window were ATLANTIS A and B and
ECASS 2, from which subgroup data specifically for the 3- to 4.5-hour window
were used by the manufacturer in sensitivity analyses. The manufacturer noted
that this involved stratifying data into subgroups that had not been specified
before randomisation. The manufacturer also identified the third International

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
Stroke Trial (IST-3), a randomised open-label blinded endpoint trial in which
alteplase was administered within 6 hours of symptom onset. However, the
manufacturer commented that this trial was not placebo controlled and therefore
did not meet its trial selection criteria, and that no published results were
available at the time of submission.
3.4 ECASS 3 was a placebo-controlled multicentre trial carried out across 130 sites in
19 European countries. Of the 821 patients 22 were from the UK. Patients were
eligible for inclusion if aged between 18 and 80 years, diagnosed with acute
ischaemic stroke and able to receive treatment within 3 to 4.5 hours of the onset
of stroke symptoms. Before randomisation, brain imaging was used to exclude
intracranial haemorrhage. The trial randomly assigned eligible patients to receive
0.9 mg/kg of intravenous alteplase (n=418) or placebo (n=403). Patients were
followed up for 90 days for outcomes. Baseline demographic and disease
characteristics were similar between participants in the 2 treatment arms, but the
initial severity of the stroke (as assessed by the National Institutes of Health
stroke scale [NIHSS; a 15-item quantitative measure of stroke-related
neurological impairment]) and the proportion of patients with a history of
previous stroke were both significantly higher in the placebo arm.
3.5 The primary outcome in ECASS 3 was the presence or absence of disability at
90 days as assessed by the modified Rankin scale, which measures the degree of
disability or dependence in people who have had a stroke and ranges from 0
(symptom free) to 6 (dead). From intention-to-treat analyses, 52.4% of patients
randomised to the alteplase treatment arm had a favourable outcome at 90 days
(a score of 0 or 1 [no significant disability]) compared with 45.2% of patients
randomised to placebo (odds ratio [OR] 1.34, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02 to
1.76, p=0.04). After adjustment for confounding baseline variables (identified as
being statistically significant at p<0.10) including treatment arm, NIHSS score,
smoking, time from onset of stroke to treatment, and presence or absence of
previous hypertension, alteplase remained statistically significantly associated
with a favourable outcome (OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.02 to 1.98, p=0.04).
3.6 ECASS 3 also reported the composite outcome of death or dependence (defined
as a score of 3 to 6 on the modified Rankin scale) at 90 days. There were no
statistically significant differences in the number of patients who were dead or
dependent between the alteplase and placebo treatment arms (33.5% compared

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
with 38.5%, relative risk [RR] 0.87, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.05).
3.7 The ECASS 3 trial also reported as a secondary endpoint a global outcome score
at 90 days, which combined a score of 0 to 1 on the modified Rankin scale, a
score of 1 on the Glasgow outcome scale (a 5-point measure of brain injury, with
1 indicating independence and 5 death), a score of 95 to 100 on the Barthel index
(a 10-item measure of a person's daily function, with higher scores reflecting
higher function), and a score of 0 to 1 on the NIHSS. Randomisation to alteplase
was associated with a statistically significantly higher probability of achieving a
favourable global outcome score (OR 1.28, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.65, p=0.05).
3.8 The manufacturer presented a summary of adverse reactions based on intention-
to-treat analyses in the ECASS 3 trial at 90 days. Fatal adverse reactions were
reported for 7.7% of patients in the alteplase arm and 8.4% of those in the
placebo arm. A statistically significantly higher proportion of patients in the
alteplase arm had an intracranial haemorrhage (27.0% compared with 17.6%,
p=0.001) or a symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage (2.4% compared with 0.3%,
p=0.008) compared with the placebo arm. Three patients (0.7%) randomised to
the alteplase arm had a fatal intracranial haemorrhage. Investigator-defined drug-
related adverse reactions were reported for 23.9% of patients in the alteplase
treatment arm and 6.9% of patients in the placebo arm. Other serious adverse
reactions were reported for 25.1% of patients in the alteplase arm and 24.6% of
those in the placebo arm.
3.9 The manufacturer conducted meta-analyses to calculate the relative risks
associated with alteplase for all-cause mortality within 90 days, death or
dependence within 90 days, and symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage within
10 days for each of the 3 treatment windows (0 to 3 hours, 3 to 4.5 hours, and 0
to 4.5 hours). The manufacturer presented results from both fixed and random-
effects models. For the 0- to 3-hour window, the manufacturer used data from
ECASS 2 and NINDS and used the relative risks from ECASS 3 for the 3- to
4.5-hour window. For the 0- to 4.5-hour window, the manufacturer used data
from ECASS 2 (0 to 3 hours), ECASS 3 (3 to 4.5 hours) and NINDS (0 to 3 hours).
Heterogeneity between the 3 studies was low for the outcomes of all-cause
mortality and death or dependence, but moderate for the outcome of
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
3.10 The manufacturer compared all-cause mortality at 90 days for the 2 treatment
arms. No statistically significant difference was observed between alteplase and
placebo for the 3- to 4.5-hour (RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.50 to 1.33, p=0.42), the 0- to
3-hour (RR 1.05, 95% CI 0.55 to 2.03, p=0.88) or the 0- to 4.5-hour (RR 0.89, 95%
CI 0.67 to 1.18, p=0.41) treatment windows. For the outcome of death or
dependence at 90 days, the manufacturer reported no statistically significant
difference between alteplase and placebo for the 3- to 4.5-hour window (RR 0.87,
95% CI 0.73 to 1.05, p=0.14). However, a statistically significant difference in
favour of alteplase was reported for both the 0- to 3-hour window (RR 0.81, 95%
CI 0.72 to 0.92, p=0.002) and the 0- to 4.5-hour window (RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.75 to
0.92, p<0.001). For the outcome of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage
occurring within 10 days, patients randomised to receive alteplase within the 3-
to 4.5-hour window had a statistically significant higher risk (RR 4.82, 95% CI 1.06
to 21.87, p=0.04), with similar results for the 0- to 4.5-hour treatment window (RR
4.18, 95% CI 1.39 to 12.53, p=0.01). For the 0- to 3-hour window, the
manufacturer reported a higher risk of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage
among patients randomised to alteplase that was not statistically significant (RR
3.94, 95% CI 0.61 to 25.47, p=0.15).
3.11 The manufacturer conducted a systematic review of published cost-
effectiveness analyses but did not identify any studies that evaluated the cost
effectiveness of alteplase for the treatment of acute ischaemic stroke within 3 to
4.5 hours of onset of symptoms. Instead, the manufacturer adapted a published
cost-effectiveness analysis (Sandercock et al. 2002) relevant to the decision
problem from the previous guidance on alteplase in acute ischaemic stroke (NICE
technology appraisal guidance 122) and used this as part of its submission.
3.12 The manufacturer developed a Markov model simulating patients with acute
ischaemic stroke who do or do not receive alteplase within 4.5 hours of onset of
symptoms. Patients were modelled through 3 possible health states:
independent, dependent and dead. The independent state was defined by a
modified Rankin scale score of 0 to 2 and the dependent state by a modified
Rankin scale score of 3 to 5. The model had 3 time phases: from 0 to 6 months
when the model assumed the treatment effect of alteplase was complete at
90 days and maintained at 6 months; from 6 to 12 months when the model
assumed no further treatment effect; and beyond 12 months when the model also
assumed no further treatment effect from alteplase. However, beyond 12 months

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
the model assumed that people in the dependent or independent states could
have a recurrent stroke. The model also assumed that people in the dependent
state at 12 months and beyond do not move to an independent state, and that
people in the independent state at 12 months and beyond do not move to a
dependent state unless they survive a recurrent stroke. The model assumed a
lifetime horizon with a cycle length of 6 months for the first 12 months, followed
by cycles of 12 months thereafter.
3.13 The manufacturer chose a population for the model based on SITS-MOST ('Safe
implementation of thrombolysis in stroke-monitoring study'), a European
observational study of patients receiving alteplase. The manufacturer considered
that this study population represented the mean age (68 years) and gender
distribution (39.8% female) of patients who would receive alteplase in clinical
practice in England and Wales.
3.14 For the first phase (0 to 6 months) of the manufacturer's economic model, the
size of the effect of treatment with alteplase was informed by the manufacturer's
meta-analyses for the 3 treatment windows as described in section 3.8. For the
standard treatment arm, the proportion of people in each health state (39.53%
independent, 32.56% dependent and 27.91% dead) was informed by the Lothian
stroke registry, a registry in Edinburgh, Scotland, of 1,779 inpatients with
suspected or confirmed stroke from 1989 to 2000. The manufacturer also
provided an alternative distribution of the proportion of people who received
standard treatment in each health state from the placebo arm of the ECASS 3
trial at 90 days. This alternative distribution (61.54% independent, 30.27%
dependent and 8.19% dead) was used by the ERG in exploratory sensitivity
analyses. The manufacturer then used the relative risks of death and death or
dependence to calculate the distribution of people in the alteplase arm across the
independent, dependent and dead states at the end of the first phase
(6 months). The manufacturer used the relative risk of death to estimate the
proportion of people who would die and therefore enter the dead state during the
first phase. The proportion of people in the dependent state at 6 months was
calculated as the difference between the estimated proportion of people who
were dead or dependent, and the estimated proportion who were dead. The
manufacturer assumed in the model that a symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage
had a cost impact (because it required a further diagnostic computed
tomography [CT] scan), with the health consequences being captured in the

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
outcome of death or dependence from the clinical trials.
3.15 For the second phase of the model (6 to 12 months), the manufacturer assumed
that people could move from the independent or dependent state to any other
health state with equal probabilities for both treatment arms. These transition
probabilities were based on the Lothian stroke registry. For the third phase of the
model (beyond 12 months), the annual risk of a recurrent stroke (0.05), and the
associated risk of mortality (0.25), were taken from the Lothian stroke registry. To
estimate the mortality risk for people who did not have another stroke, the
manufacturer took data from the Office for National Statistics life tables for
England and Wales and adjusted them upward by a factor of 2.3 (taken from the
Perth Community Stroke Study) to reflect the higher mortality rates among
people who have had a stroke compared with the general UK population.
3.16 The manufacturer conducted a literature review to identify appropriate utility
values for the independent and dependent states in the model. The manufacturer
did not identify any relevant utility values additional to those used in NICE
technology appraisal guidance 122 on alteplase in acute ischaemic stroke within
the first 3 hours after symptom onset. The manufacturer's submission for this
appraisal identified 1 trial (Dorman et al. 1997) that collected EQ-5D utility values
in a sample of 147 patients from the Lothian stroke registry. This trial provided
utility values of 0.74 (95% CI 0.69 to 0.79) for the independent state and 0.38
(95% CI 0.29 to 0.47) for the dependent state. The model assumed that these
utility values remained fixed over time unless a person had a recurrent stroke
which resulted in dependence, and thus a move from the independent to the
dependent state.
3.17 The model included drug acquisition and administration costs as well as the costs
of acute and long-term stroke care. The cost of alteplase was based on the mean
body weight (76 kg) of patients in the 3- to 4.5-hour cohort from the SITS-MOST
trial. Based on the recommended dose of 0.9 mg/kg, the average dose was
68.4 mg, resulting in a total estimated cost of £480 (£300 per 50-mg pack and
£180 per 20-mg pack). Administration costs associated with alteplase of £1,316
per patient were based on estimates of extra staff time in the trial by Sandercock
et al. (2002). For people in either treatment arm who had a symptomatic
intracranial haemorrhage, the model included a one-off cost of £100 for an
additional CT scan. For all health states in the model, the manufacturer applied

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
annual costs specific to the state (adjusted for inflation to 2012 to 2013 prices)
adapted from a study by Youman et al. (2003), which calculated the costs of
acute events and long-term stroke care.
3.18 The manufacturer's base-case deterministic cost-effectiveness analysis for the
0- to 4.5-hour window estimated an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER)
of £2,441 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained for alteplase compared
with standard care (incremental costs £811; incremental QALYs 0.333). The
probabilistic cost-effectiveness analysis resulted in an ICER of £2,296 per QALY
gained.
3.19 The manufacturer conducted a number of one-way sensitivity analyses on
various parameters in the model, including the relative risks associated with
alteplase of death or of death or dependence, the risk of recurrent stroke and
mortality irrespective of previous treatment, the dose of alteplase treatment, the
annual costs of care in the dependent and independent states, the cost of a fatal
stroke, and the utility values. The results of these one-way sensitivity analyses
indicated that the ICERs were robust to changes in most input parameters,
except for the relative risks of death and death or dependence for treatment with
alteplase applied in the first phase of the model. When the manufacturer used the
upper limit of the 95% confidence interval for the relative risks of death (1.18) and
death or dependence (0.92), alteplase treatment led to a very small loss in QALYs
at a decreased cost compared with standard care, resulting in £44,342 saved per
QALY lost. The manufacturer also conducted additional deterministic sensitivity
analyses, which included different scenarios using additional clinical efficacy data
from unplanned subgroup analyses of the ATLANTIS A and B and ECASS 2 trials
for 3 to 4.5 hours, and weighted the results based on the assumption that in UK
clinical practice a higher proportion of patients are treated during the 0- to
3-hour window (76%) than during the 3- to 4.5-hour window (24%). Using these
analyses, alteplase either dominated placebo (that is, was both less costly and
more effective) or had an ICER below £2,000 per QALY gained. Results of the
probabilistic sensitivity analysis showed that alteplase had a high probability
(above 90%) of being cost effective at a level of £20,000 to £30,000 per QALY
gained.
3.20 The manufacturer's base-case deterministic cost-effectiveness analysis for the
3- to 4.5-hour window resulted in an ICER of £6,272 per QALY gained for

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
alteplase compared with standard care (incremental costs £2,068; incremental
QALYs 0.33). The probabilistic cost-effectiveness analysis resulted in an ICER of
£6,169 per QALY gained. The results of the one-way sensitivity analyses were
similar to those for the 0- to 4.5-hour window, indicating that the ICERs were
robust to changes in most input parameters, except for changes in the relative
risks of death and death or dependence for treatment with alteplase. In an
additional sensitivity analysis, the manufacturer pooled 3- to 4.5-hour efficacy
data from the ECASS 2 and ATLANTIS trials with the ECASS 3 data. This
sensitivity analysis resulted in an ICER of £5,631 per QALY gained for alteplase
compared with standard care.
3.21 For the 0- to 3-hour treatment window, the manufacturer presented cost-
effectiveness results similar to those presented in the previous guidance on
alteplase in acute ischaemic stroke (NICE technology appraisal guidance 122);
that is, alteplase dominated standard care, resulting in lower costs and more
QALYs for both the deterministic and the probabilistic analyses.
3.22 The ERG considered that the clinical-effectiveness evidence submitted by the
manufacturer was of good quality. The ERG noted that the patients randomised
to the alteplase arm of both the NINDS trial (which provided clinical evidence for
the 0- to 3-hour window) and the ECASS 3 trial had strokes that were less severe
on average, which in turn may have biased the results in favour of alteplase.
However, the manufacturer also presented adjusted analyses for the primary
outcome (disability at 90 days) from the ECASS 3 trial. The ERG considered that
the meta-analytical approach by the manufacturer was appropriate. The ERG
agreed with the manufacturer that data derived from unplanned subgroup
analyses from the ATLANTIS A and B and ECASS 2 trials, in which treatment with
alteplase was administered up to 6 hours from onset of symptoms, should not be
included in the base-case meta-analyses. The ERG also noted that heterogeneity
between the studies included in the base-case meta-analyses for the 0- to
4.5-hour window for the outcomes of death and death or dependence was low
and not statistically significant.
3.23 The ERG commented that the manufacturer submitted an economic model that
was in line with the decision problem defined in the scope and closely adhered to
the NICE reference case requirements for economic analysis. The ERG
commented that the manufacturer provided a reasonable strategy for searching

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
the literature for existing cost-effectiveness studies, although it did not explicitly
state its exclusion criteria. The ERG stated that it was appropriate for the
manufacturer to conduct separate analyses for patients eligible for treatment
within the 0- to 3-hour window and the 3- to 4.5-hour window. The ERG noted
that the utility values for the dependent and independent states did not allow for
any decreases in health-related quality of life over time, which may have
overestimated the lifetime QALYs accrued in the independent state. The ERG
stated that, although this may have biased the QALY gains in favour of alteplase,
the manufacturer's economic model was not sensitive to changes in the utility
values, and so the effect of adjusting these values over time in the model was
likely to be small. The ERG noted that in the probabilistic sensitivity analysis, the
manufacturer sampled independently the relative risks for death and death or
dependence associated with treatment with alteplase, which had a marked
impact on the ICERs in the one-way sensitivity analyses. The ERG noted that this
did not take into account the likely correlation between the outcomes of death
and death or dependence, and that the probabilistic sensitivity analysis might not
provide an accurate description of the uncertainty around the mean costs and
QALYs, although the ERG did not expect it to have a large impact on the ICER.
3.24 The ERG conducted an exploratory sensitivity analysis by replacing the
proportion of people in the 3 health states (dependent, independent and dead) at
the end of the first phase (0 to 6 months) taken from the Lothian stroke registry
with those observed in the ECASS 3 trial population. Because mortality rates
were lower in the ECASS 3 trial, a higher proportion of patients were in the
independent state (61.54%) and a lower proportion in the dead state (8.19%). This
sensitivity analysis resulted in an ICER of £4,451 per QALY gained for alteplase
compared with standard care for the 0- to 4.5-hour window (incremental costs
£698; incremental QALYs 0.157).
3.25 Full details of all the evidence are in the manufacturer's submission and the ERG
report.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of alteplase, having considered evidence on the nature of acute
ischaemic stroke and the value placed on the benefits of alteplase by people with
the condition, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It also took into
account the effective use of NHS resources.
4.2 The Committee discussed the place of alteplase in the clinical pathway for people
who have had an acute ischaemic stroke. The Committee heard from the clinical
specialists that alteplase is routinely used in the NHS in England and Wales in
patients aged 18 to 80 years within 4.5 hours of onset of symptoms. The
Committee was aware of the recently published third International Stroke Trial
(IST-3), an open-label trial comparing alteplase with standard care. However, the
Committee noted that the manufacturer had excluded this trial from its
submission because it provided data that were not restricted to alteplase within
its current UK marketing authorisation; specifically, the trial included patients
aged above 80 years and patients who were treated up to 6 hours after the onset
of symptoms.
4.3 The Committee heard from clinical specialists that alteplase is more effective the
earlier it is given to patients. The clinical specialists commented that, while
extending the treatment window to 4.5 hours would enable more patients to be
treated with alteplase, this might result in some patients who present early
receiving delayed treatment and therefore not benefiting from alteplase to the
extent that they might otherwise have. The clinical specialists and patient experts
emphasised the importance of treating patients with acute ischaemic stroke as
early as possible.
4.4 The Committee heard from the patient experts that an important benefit of
alteplase was its potential to reduce long-term disability caused by stroke, which
can affect the quality of life of the patient and their families, carers and friends,
and can also increase the need to adjust the patient's lifestyle and living
conditions. The Committee was aware that brain imaging must be carried out to
confirm the absence of intracranial bleeding before treatment with alteplase can
be started. However, the Committee heard from 1 patient expert that some

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
people with acute ischaemic stroke may not have immediate access to brain-
imaging facilities. The Committee recognised the importance of this issue, and
noted the NICE Quality Standard for Stroke, which recommends that patients with
acute stroke receive brain imaging within 1 hour of arrival at hospital. The
Committee also heard from clinical specialists that Accident and Emergency
departments of all acute-care hospitals in England and Wales should have access
to 24-hour, 7 days a week brain-imaging facilities. The Committee recognised
that patients outside the licensed indication for alteplase (under 18 years and
over 80 years of age) in England and Wales may have the potential to benefit
from treatment with the technology. However, consistent with NICE methods, the
Committee was aware that it can only make recommendations based on the
current marketing authorisation for alteplase.
4.5 The Committee considered the evidence submitted by the manufacturer on the
clinical effectiveness of alteplase. The Committee noted that no clinical-
effectiveness data for the 0- to 3-hour treatment window additional to those
included in NICE technology appraisal guidance 122 were available, and that
clinical-effectiveness data for the 3- to 4.5-hour treatment window were derived
primarily from the ECASS 3 trial. The Committee heard from clinical specialists
that, although the trial included only a small proportion of patients from the UK,
the results of the trial were generalisable to patients receiving alteplase
treatment in England and Wales. The Committee also heard from the clinical
specialists that it was reasonable for the manufacturer to measure the
effectiveness of alteplase from analyses that adjusted for baseline differences in
potential confounding variables between the 2 treatment groups. In addition, the
clinical specialists noted that the modified Rankin scale was widely used as a
measure of disability in stroke patients in England and Wales. The Committee
concluded that the ECASS 3 trial was of good methodological quality and
provided robust evidence of the clinical efficacy of alteplase for the 3- to
4.5-hour treatment window.
4.6 The Committee considered the clinical effectiveness of alteplase for the 3- to
4.5-hour treatment window. The Committee noted that no statistically significant
differences in mortality, or in the composite outcome of death or dependence,
between patients randomised to alteplase or standard care were observed at
90-day follow-up. However, the Committee also noted that a statistically
significantly higher proportion of patients in the alteplase treatment arm achieved

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
a favourable outcome without significant disability (modified Rankin scale score
of 0 or 1) at 90-day follow-up. The Committee therefore concluded that alteplase
administered between 3 and 4.5 hours after onset of stroke symptoms was an
effective treatment for acute ischaemic stroke because it decreased the
probability of disability.
4.7 The Committee considered the manufacturer's meta-analyses, which generated
alternative estimates of alteplase's effect on all-cause mortality and also on
death or dependence (modified Rankin scale score of 3 to 6) at 90 days for each
of the 3 treatment windows (0 to 3 hours, 3 to 4.5 hours, and 0 to 4.5 hours), and
which were used for the clinical-effectiveness parameters in the manufacturer's
economic model. The Committee noted that the trials included in the meta-
analyses for the 0- to 4.5-hour treatment window were of good methodological
quality and were sufficiently similar in terms of study design and results. The
Committee noted that there were no statistically significant differences in all-
cause mortality reported at 90 days between alteplase and placebo for any of the
3 treatment windows. Therefore, the Committee agreed that an effect of
alteplase on improving survival has currently not been proven. The Committee
noted that a statistically significant difference in favour of alteplase was reported
for the composite outcome of death or dependence for the 0- to 3-hour and 0-
to 4.5-hour treatment windows in the manufacturer's meta-analyses. The
Committee therefore concluded that alteplase administered between 0 and
4.5 hours after onset of stroke symptoms was an effective treatment for acute
ischaemic stroke because it decreased the probability of death or dependence.
4.8 The Committee considered the evidence on adverse reactions associated with
alteplase. The Committee noted that a significantly higher proportion of patients
in the alteplase arm had symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage within 10 days
compared with the placebo arm for the 3- to 4.5-hour window in the ECASS 3
trial and for the 0- to 4.5-hour window in the manufacturer's meta-analyses.
However, the Committee noted that while alteplase increased the risk of
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage, the absolute number of patients in the
ECASS 3 trial who had a symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage was small. The
Committee heard from the clinical specialists that symptomatic intracranial
haemorrhage is the primary cause of death within 7 days for patients receiving
alteplase treatment, and that clinicians have difficulty predicting which patients
are at high risk. The Committee also noted that the proportion of other reported

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
serious adverse reactions and fatal adverse reactions in the ECASS 3 trial up to
90 days was similar across the 2 treatment arms. The Committee concluded that,
although the increased risk of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage associated
with alteplase is offset by significant improvements in favourable outcomes at
90 days, symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage is an adverse event that needs to
be included in modelling of the cost effectiveness of alteplase.
4.9 The Committee considered the manufacturer's economic model, the assumptions
on which the parameters were based, and the critique and exploratory analyses
conducted by the ERG. The Committee noted that the model structure and many
of the input parameters were identical to those used in the economic model for
NICE technology appraisal guidance 122 (0- to 3-hour window) and agreed that
this approach was appropriate. With regard to the clinical-effectiveness
parameters used in the model, the Committee acknowledged that the survival
benefit associated with alteplase compared with standard care, which resulted
from a point estimate for the relative risk for alteplase treatment and death of
less than 1, was appropriately reflected in the economic model. However, the
Committee noted that the manufacturer had assumed that the relative treatment
effect of alteplase was maintained beyond 90 days up to 6 months in the model
with no longer-term survival benefit beyond this point. The Committee
considered that this may have been a conservative approach if alteplase offers a
survival advantage compared with placebo beyond 6 months, a proposition the
Committee found plausible, although not currently proven statistically, given that
alteplase was associated with a reduction in death or dependence at 90 days.
The Committee was aware that the utility values were not adjusted over time in
the model, which may have overestimated the QALYs accrued by people in the
independent health state and therefore biased the results in favour of alteplase.
However, the Committee considered that this was not a crucial limitation of the
model because the ICERs were not sensitive to changes in the utility values in the
manufacturer's sensitivity analyses, and therefore any downward adjustment over
time would have had a small impact on the ICERs. The Committee was also aware
that the manufacturer assumed that people who had a symptomatic intracranial
haemorrhage in the economic model incurred the additional one-off cost of a CT
scan but experienced no further disutility beyond that captured in the dependent
or independent health states. The Committee heard from the clinical specialists
that this assumption was reasonable. Overall, the Committee concluded that the
economic model adhered to the NICE reference case for economic analysis and

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
the modelling approach was reasonable.
4.10 The Committee considered the most plausible ICERs presented by the
manufacturer and also by the ERG in its exploratory analyses. It agreed that
alteplase either dominated standard care or had an ICER below £10,000 per QALY
gained depending on the time-to-treatment window considered. The Committee
noted that the results were robust for most of the deterministic sensitivity
analyses conducted by the manufacturer. The Committee also noted that none of
the additional exploratory analyses undertaken by the ERG resulted in ICERs that
varied substantially from those presented in the manufacturer's submission. The
Committee considered that patients with acute ischaemic stroke who are
admitted to hospital later (beyond 3 hours after onset of symptoms) may have
less severe stroke and so any absolute benefit of treatment with alteplase
compared with standard care may be diminished, resulting in a higher ICER.
However, the Committee noted that the ICER for the 3- to 4.5-hour treatment
window was low and therefore concluded that treating acute ischaemic stroke
with alteplase within 0 to 4.5 hours of onset of stroke symptoms was a cost-
effective use of NHS resources. The Committee also agreed with the clinical
specialists that extending the time window for treatment should not diminish the
urgency with which people suspected of having an acute ischaemic stroke should
be treated.
4.11 The Committee discussed whether any equality issues required consideration in
this appraisal. The Committee was aware that extension of the licence to
4.5 hours after symptom onset may enable increased access to treatment with
alteplase for patients in remote or rural locations.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has acute ischaemic stroke and the healthcare professional responsible
for their care thinks that alteplase is the right treatment, it should be available for
use, in line with NICE's recommendations.

Alteplase for treating acute ischaemic stroke (TA264)
6 Recommendations for further research
6.1 The clinical efficacy and safety of thrombolysis with alteplase for acute ischaemic
stroke is being assessed outside of its current marketing authorisation,
specifically in patients aged up to 80 years and up to 6 hours from onset of
stroke symptoms (the third International Stroke Trial [IST-3]).