Empagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
1 Recommendations
1.1 Empagliflozin is recommended as an option for treating symptomatic
chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction in adults, only if it is
used as an add-on to optimised standard care with:
• an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin 2 receptor
blocker (ARB), with a beta blocker and, if tolerated, a mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonist (MRA), or
• sacubitril valsartan with a beta blocker and, if tolerated, an MRA.
1.2 Start empagliflozin for treating symptomatic heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction on the advice of a heart failure specialist. Monitoring
should be done by the most appropriate healthcare professional.
1.3 This recommendation is not intended to affect treatment with
empagliflozin that was started in the NHS before this guidance was
published. People having treatment outside these recommendations may
continue without change to the funding arrangements in place for them
before this guidance was published, until they and their NHS clinician
consider it appropriate to stop.
Why the committee made these recommendations
People with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction may have symptoms that are not
controlled well enough despite being on the most appropriate (optimised) standard care.
Standard care includes an ACE inhibitor or an ARB, with a beta blocker and, if tolerated, an
MRA. Then, if symptoms continue on this, people may be offered sacubitril valsartan with a
beta blocker and, if tolerated, an MRA.
Evidence from a clinical trial shows that empagliflozin plus standard care reduces the risk
of dying from cardiovascular causes compared with placebo plus standard care. It also
shows that it reduces the likelihood of hospitalisation for heart failure. There are no trials
directly comparing empagliflozin with the most appropriate comparator, dapagliflozin.

 
However, an indirect comparison suggests that empagliflozin is likely to be similar to
dapagliflozin in reducing the risk of dying and the likelihood of hospitalisations for heart
failure.
The cost-effectiveness estimates for empagliflozin are within what NICE normally
considers an acceptable use of NHS resources. So empagliflozin is recommended.
Increased monitoring or changes to other medicines being taken may be needed for
treating heart failure with empagliflozin. So, it should only be started on advice from a
heart failure specialist.

 
2 Information about empagliflozin
Marketing authorisation indication
2.1 Empagliflozin (Jardiance, Boehringer Ingelheim) has a marketing
authorisation 'in adults for the treatment of symptomatic chronic heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction'.
Dosage in the marketing authorisation
2.2 The dosage schedule is available in the summary of product
characteristics.
Price
2.3 The list price of 10 mg or 25 mg empagliflozin is £36.59 per 28-tablet
pack (excluding VAT; BNF online, accessed November 2021). The annual
treatment cost is £476.98. Costs may vary in different settings because
of negotiated procurement discounts.

 
3 Committee discussion
The appraisal committee considered evidence submitted by Boehringer Ingelheim, a
review of this submission by the evidence review group (ERG) and responses from
stakeholders. See the committee papers for full details of the evidence.
The condition
People with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
would welcome a new treatment option
3.1 Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction is a chronic condition that
affects survival and quality of life. The patient experts highlighted the
psychological effects of a diagnosis. They explained that breathlessness,
extreme fatigue and fluid accumulation in particular can be debilitating.
Clinical expert submissions to NICE confirmed that heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction is associated with high rates of death and
hospitalisation. They also stated that there is an unmet need for new
treatment options. Current treatments aim to manage symptoms and
stabilise the disease to prevent further decline in quality of life and to
keep people alive longer. The clinical experts explained that, despite
optimising therapies, many people still have symptoms, including
breathlessness. The patient experts said that they would welcome a new
treatment option, especially if it could be used early in the treatment
pathway. The committee concluded that there is an unmet need for a
new treatment option for symptomatic chronic heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction. It also concluded that people with the condition and
healthcare professionals would welcome a new treatment option.

 
The treatment pathway
People should be optimised on standard care before having a
sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor
3.2 NICE's guideline on diagnosing and managing chronic heart failure in
adults recommends a range of drug treatments for newly diagnosed
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. These are separated into
first-line and specialist treatments. First-line treatments include
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, or angiotensin 2
receptor blockers (ARBs) when an ACE inhibitor is not tolerated. Beta
blockers can also be offered and a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
(MRA) can be offered if appropriate and tolerated. The company's
submission had suggested that empagliflozin should be positioned as an
add-on to first-line treatment in people with heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction who may or may not have comorbidities. The committee
understood that this is narrower than the marketing authorisation, which
does not specify use as an add-on treatment for heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction. The clinical experts said the company's
positioning was now in line with the European Society of Cardiology
guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart
failure. These guidelines recommend that empagliflozin or dapagliflozin
(another SGLT2 inhibitor) could be started earlier in the care pathway for
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. The committee noted this
was not directly in line with NICE's technology appraisal guidance on
dapagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction. This recommends that dapagliflozin is used after standard care
is optimised. The committee noted that there are a range of treatments
for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. It concluded that
empagliflozin was an appropriate treatment that should be used as an
add-on to optimised standard care.
Dapagliflozin is the most appropriate comparator for this
appraisal
3.3 The final scope for this appraisal listed 2 comparators: individually
optimised standard care without empagliflozin, and dapagliflozin as an

 
add-on to standard care. The company stated that individually optimised
standard care was the most relevant comparator. That is, people should
have the most appropriate treatments used for standard care before
starting treatment with empagliflozin. This was because most people
with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction in England and Wales
would have at least one of these treatment options. It did not consider
dapagliflozin to be a relevant comparator because it considered that this
was not standard care in the NHS. It cited recent market data suggesting
that dapagliflozin is used by very few people with heart failure alone, and
is most frequently used by people with heart failure and type 2 diabetes.
The committee noted that NICE's technology appraisal guidance on
dapagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction had only been published in February 2021 so there had been a
relatively short period of time to consider uptake. The clinical experts
stated uptake had increased widely since publication of the guidance
and that it would now be considered as standard care. The committee
considered whether empagliflozin and dapagliflozin would likely be used
interchangeably in the same place in the treatment pathway for chronic
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. The clinical experts said that
the European Society of Cardiology guidelines on the diagnosis and
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure did not distinguish between
the 2 SGLT2 inhibitors. For this reason, they would also consider that
empagliflozin and dapagliflozin would be used in the same groups of
people. They further noted that it would be unlikely that someone who is
not eligible for treatment with dapagliflozin would be eligible for
treatment with empagliflozin. This was because the technologies are
considered to work in the same way. The committee concluded that
dapagliflozin was the most appropriate comparator for this appraisal.
Clinical evidence
EMPEROR-Reduced is the key trial and is broadly generalisable to
NHS clinical practice
3.4 EMPEROR-Reduced was a double-blind randomised clinical trial
comparing empagliflozin plus standard care with placebo plus standard
care. Standard care could include medical therapy with an ACE inhibitor,

 
an ARB, a beta blocker or an MRA. The trial included people aged at least
18 who had had a diagnosis of chronic heart failure for at least 3 months.
They had moderate to severe heart failure with reduced ejection fraction.
This was defined by a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% or less
based on the New York Heart Association functional class 2 to 4. The
clinical experts said that the trial findings were generalisable to NHS
clinical practice. However, they highlighted several differences between
the population in EMPEROR-Reduced and people having treatment in the
NHS:
• The average age in the intention-to-treat population was 67 years, while the
average in the NHS at diagnosis is 77 years.
• The proportion of women (24%) was smaller than would be expected in the
NHS.
• The proportion of people using an ACE inhibitor or ARB was lower than would
be expected in the NHS.
The ERG stated that the characteristics of people in EMPEROR-Reduced, may
not reflect that of the population in the NHS. The clinical experts agreed this
might be an issue of how people are recruited to take part in clinical trials.
People who are older and who might have more comorbidities would be less
likely to be involved in a clinical trial so they might be under-represented. The
committee noted EMPEROR-Reduced was not powered to show any difference
in subgroups by age. The clinical experts said there would be no apparent
reason why relative treatment effects would be different between subgroups of
younger and older ages. The committee concluded that data from the
intention-to-treat population in EMPEROR-Reduced was broadly generalisable
to NHS clinical practice.
Empagliflozin plus standard care compared with placebo plus
standard care is clinically effective
3.5 The primary efficacy outcome in EMPEROR-Reduced was a composite of
cardiovascular death and hospitalisation for heart failure. Intention-to-
treat analyses showed that empagliflozin plus standard care reduced the
incidence of the primary outcome by 25.0% compared with placebo plus
standard care (hazard ratio [HR] 0.75; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.65

 
to 0.86; p<0.0001). At a median follow up of 16 months, results showed
that 19.4% of people having empagliflozin plus standard care had an
event compared with 24.7% in the placebo group. The committee
concluded that empagliflozin is clinically effective compared with
placebo and that it reduces the risk of cardiovascular events when added
to standard care.
Indirect treatment comparison
The indirect treatment comparison shows that clinical outcomes
between empagliflozin and dapagliflozin are similar
3.6 There were no trials directly comparing empagliflozin with dapagliflozin
so the company presented an indirect treatment comparison using the
Bucher method. This compared the results from EMPEROR-Reduced with
those from DAPA-HF. DAPA-HF was a phase 3 multinational double-blind
randomised controlled trial. It compared dapagliflozin plus standard care
with placebo plus standard care in people with stable symptoms of heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction. The company supported the
indirect comparison with the results from a published pooled meta-
analysis reported by Zannad et al. (2020). This pooled data for
dapagliflozin and empagliflozin to create class effect estimates for
SGLT2 inhibitors compared with placebo. The ERG broadly agreed that
the results from the meta-analyses suggested there was a statistically
significant benefit with SGLT2 inhibitors compared with placebo for all
outcomes. However, the ERG noted that the results of the meta-analysis
were only based on 1 trial of empagliflozin and 1 trial of dapagliflozin. It
therefore considered the Bucher comparison was a more appropriate
method of assessing the comparative efficacy of empagliflozin compared
with dapagliflozin. The results of the indirect treatment comparison
suggested there was no difference between empagliflozin and
dapagliflozin in any of the outcomes (all results are confidential and
cannot be reported here). However, the results suggested a trend
towards possible differences in cardiovascular deaths, all-cause
mortality and renal function. The committee was aware that the ERG had
explored this uncertainty in the cost–utility analysis (see section 3.8).
The committee noted that there were some baseline differences in the

 
Bucher indirect treatment comparison between people in EMPEROR-
Reduced and DAPA-HF. People in EMPEROR-Reduced may have had a
more severe renal impairment than people in DAPA-HF. This meant that
people in EMPEROR-Reduced may have been more likely to have a
hospitalisation for heart failure or mortality event compared with those in
DAPA-HF. The committee acknowledged the limitations of the
comparison but agreed it was appropriate for decision making. The
committee concluded that the results of the Bucher indirect treatment
comparison showed that the clinical outcomes between empagliflozin
and dapagliflozin are similar.
The company's economic model
The company's model is suitable for decision making
3.7 The company modelled cost effectiveness using a state transition model
with 5 states (4 based on symptom severity plus 1 for death). It captured
disease severity using the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire
(KCCQ) Clinical Summary Score (CSS). This is a disease-specific
measure of quality of life. People transitioned through quartiles based on
KCCQ-CSS (0 to 100, with high scores indicating lower symptom
burden), and a specific utility and cost associated with each state. The
committee considered whether the KCCQ is an appropriate measure to
capture quality-of-life outcomes. It noted that there may be some
inconsistencies in how the size of effect translates from trial data to
modelled quality-of-life effects. The clinical experts explained that the
KCCQ is a well-validated comprehensive quality-of-life and symptom
questionnaire for heart failure. The ERG stated that it was satisfied with
the company's choice of KCCQ-CSS states in the model. The committee
concluded that the company's model structure was appropriate for
decision making.

 
Cost-effectiveness estimates
Empagliflozin is recommended as an option for treating chronic
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
3.8 The company considered that a cost-comparison was the most
appropriate way to estimate the cost effectiveness of empagliflozin
compared with dapagliflozin. This was based on an assumption of
equivalent effectiveness between empagliflozin and dapagliflozin. It
noted that both drugs had the same list price, dosing frequency and
method of administration, and that available evidence suggested the
treatments were clinically equivalent. The ERG suggested that a
cost–utility analysis may have been more appropriate. This was because
the company's assumption of equal effectiveness was based on only
2 trials and ignored potential uncertainty (see section 3.6). After
technical engagement, the company provided a cost–utility analysis to
help with decision making. However, it argued that this type of analysis
would amplify any uncertainty in the results of the indirect treatment
comparison. The company's base-case cost–utility analysis assumed
there was no survival benefit with empagliflozin over dapagliflozin.
However, it assumed that taking empagliflozin would lead to
improvements in renal function and reduced hospitalisations for heart
failure. This was based on the results of the Bucher indirect treatment
comparison (see section 3.6). The company's probabilistic and
deterministic cost-effectiveness estimates suggested that empagliflozin
dominated dapagliflozin (meaning it was less costly and at least equally
effective). The ERG did additional scenario analyses to show the effect of
adding the different outcomes included in the Bucher indirect treatment
comparison. These scenarios included the following assumptions:
• equal effectiveness in all outcomes
• survival benefit for dapagliflozin
• survival benefit for dapagliflozin and a reduction in hospitalisations for heart
failure for empagliflozin
• survival benefit for dapagliflozin, a reduction in hospitalisations for heart failure

 
and an improvement in renal function for empagliflozin.
For the assumption of equal effectiveness, the results showed no difference in
total costs or quality-adjusted life years between the 2 treatments. The results
for the other scenarios included in the ERG's analyses were in the south-west
quadrant of the cost-effectiveness plane. This means that empagliflozin was
estimated to be less costly and less effective than dapagliflozin (the exact
results are academic in confidence and cannot be reported here). The
committee understood that the ERG's scenarios were exploratory only. It also
agreed that they were uncertain. This was because they were based on the
results of the Bucher indirect treatment comparison, which showed no overall
difference between the 2 treatments. The committee considered its earlier
conclusion that dapagliflozin was the most appropriate comparator (see
section 3.3) based on:
• its comparable mechanism of action
• its use in a comparable place in the treatment pathway
• the results of the indirect treatment comparison, which showed no difference
between the 2 treatments.
The committee was satisfied that empagliflozin is similarly effective to
dapagliflozin and that its costs are identical. It concluded to recommend
empagliflozin as an option for treating symptomatic chronic heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction.
Empagliflozin is not a step-change in treatment but does provide
choice for people with heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction
3.9 The committee recalled that people with heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction have a poor prognosis and that there is an unmet need
for treatment options (see section 3.1). It noted that empagliflozin is not
the first drug of its class to gain regulatory approval for use in heart
failure. So, it could not be considered a step-change in treatment.
However, the committee concluded that it could be considered a relevant
addition to current treatments and increase clinical choice.

 
Other factors
No equalities considerations were identified
3.10 The committee noted that the meta-analysis by Zannad et al. (2020; see
section 3.6) suggested that SGLT2 inhibitors were most effective in
people with a black or Asian family background. It noted that EMPEROR-
Reduced mainly included people with a white family background. The
committee noted that neither EMPEROR-Reduced or DAPA-HF was
powered to show difference between subgroups of different ages or
people from a different family background. The clinical experts said that
there is no reason to restrict empagliflozin use in adults based on age or
family background. The committee noted that its recommendations
applied to all people regardless of family background. It recognised that
there were no ongoing clinical trials or data collection to validate the
possibility of differences in treatment effect because of family
background. But it considered that there may be the potential to explore
this issue further in future research.
A heart failure specialist should advise on starting empagliflozin
and the most appropriate healthcare professional should monitor
treatment
3.11 NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and
management recommends that a specialist heart failure multidisciplinary
team should work in collaboration with the primary care team to start
new medicines that need specialist supervision. The committee noted
that people taking empagliflozin for heart failure who also have diabetes
might need adjustments in their diabetes medication for safety reasons
because of an increased risk of ketoacidosis. The committee considered
that risk factors should be identified, and some increased monitoring
may be needed for treating heart failure with empagliflozin. So, it
considered that a heart failure specialist was the most appropriate
clinician to advise on starting treatment. The committee also noted that
the summary of product characteristics states an assessment of renal
function is recommended before starting empagliflozin and this should
be done periodically during treatment. So, the committee considered that

 
monitoring should be done by the most appropriate healthcare
professional. The committee further noted that NICE's technology
appraisal guidance on dapagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction included recommendations on who should
advise on starting treatment and appropriate monitoring. The committee
concluded that a heart failure specialist should advise on starting
empagliflozin and monitoring should be done by the most appropriate
healthcare professional.

 
4 Implementation
4.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(Constitution and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information
Centre (Functions) Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning
groups, NHS England and, with respect to their public health functions,
local authorities to comply with the recommendations in this appraisal
within 3 months of its date of publication.
4.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on
implementing NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE
technology appraisal recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or
other technology, the NHS in Wales must usually provide funding and
resources for it within 2 months of the first publication of the final
appraisal document.
4.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make
sure it is available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This
means that, if a patient has heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
and the doctor responsible for their care thinks that empagliflozin is the
right treatment, it should be available for use, in line with NICE's
recommendations.