ESC Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Guidelines
1. Assessment of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk (the likelihood of
experiencing a cardiovascular event, such as heart attack or stroke) is
the first step to guide recommendations on prevention. CVD risk can be
calculated in people without CVD (‘primary prevention’) or with known
CVD (‘secondary prevention’), and in people with certain conditions who
are at higher risk of CVD (e.g., those with diabetes or
chronic kidney disease).
2. For people without known CVD, risk can be classified as low,
moderate, high or very high and can be assessed based on a
person’s age, blood pressure, cholesterol levels and smoking status.
Other factors (e.g., ethnicity, psychosocial, socioeconomic or
environmental factors) and health conditions may change your CVD
risk (‘risk-modifiers’). The CVD risk is very high for all people with
known CVD.
3. An informed discussion with your healthcare provider about CVD
risk and treatment benefits tailored to your needs is recommended.
Treatment decisions should be based on a shared decision-making
process between you and your healthcare provider.
4. The Guidelines recommend that everyone follow certain
recommendations, no matter their CVD risk. These include:
• stopping smoking
• following a healthy lifestyle in terms of nutrition, body
weight and physical activity
• achieving a systolic blood pressure of at least <160 mmHg
5. Adults of all ages should aim for at least 150–300 minutes
per week of moderate intensity or 75–150 minutes per week
of high intensity physical activity. Even if you cannot achieve
these time recommendations, stay as active as possible –
some activity is better than no activity!
6. A healthy diet is a cornerstone of CVD prevention: adopt a
Mediterranean or similar diet; replace saturated (e.g., fast food, red
meat) with unsaturated fat (e.g., olive oil, avocado); reduce salt intake;
eat more whole grains, fruits, vegetables and nuts; eat fish at least
once a week; and reduce added sugar intake. It is also advised to drink
no more than 100 g of alcohol per week – how this translates into
number of drinks depends on portion size, the standards of which
differ by country, but there are usually between 8 and 14 g of alcohol
per drink.

7. The use of medications to treat CVD risk factors (e.g., blood pressure,
cholesterol) depends on CVD risk. Medication is recommended for everyone
with known CVD or people without CVD but at very high risk. Medication
should be considered for people without CVD who are at high risk. However,
there is no lower limit of CVD risk that stops you from having treatment
and no upper limit of CVD risk that means treatment is mandatory. Starting
treatment should be decided on an individual basis as a result of a shared
decision-making process between you and your healthcare provider.
8. Treatment goals for risk factors (how low blood pressure
or cholesterol levels should be) also depend on CVD risk. In
general, the higher the CVD risk, the more intensive the
recommended treatment and the lower the treatment goals.
9. Treatment goals for risk factors should be achieved in a stepwise approach.
The first step is to achieve recommended goals for blood pressure and
cholesterol levels through lifestyle recommendations and medication if
needed. Once the first step is achieved, proceeding to the second step (even
lower blood pressure and cholesterol levels) should follow, based on additional
considerations (estimated 10-year and lifelong risk, other medical conditions
you may have) as well as your personal preferences. The ultimate aim of the
second step is to achieve the following optimal goals:
• systolic blood pressure <130 mmHg (for people on medication)
• low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) <1.8 mmol/L (for people
at high risk) or <1.4 mmol/L (for people at very high risk)
In this stepwise process, the entire approach (both steps) has to be considered.
10. Statins are the first-line treatment for people requiring
medication to lower their LDL-C levels. If the treatment goal
(based on an individual’s CVD risk) is not reached with the
maximum tolerated dose of a statin, combination with a
non-statin, lipid-lowering medication is recommended.
11. For people who require medication to lower their blood pressure, the
ultimate treatment goal for systolic blood pressure is 120–130 mmHg for
most adults aged <70 years, and <140 mmHg (down to 130 mmHg if tolerated)
for those aged ≥70 years. For diastolic blood pressure, a goal of <80 mmHg
is recommended for all people on medication. Antihypertensive treatment
(medications that lower your blood pressure) in a two-medicine combination
is recommended for most people.
12. For people with diabetes, a treatment goal of glycated haemoglobin
(HbA1c) <7.0% is recommended for most adults. Metformin is the first-
line treatment for most people with diabetes without CVD, whereas newer
medications (glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists [GLP-1RA] and sodium-
glucose transport protein 2 [SGLT-2] inhibitors) are recommended for people
with diabetes and CVD.

Appendix
Example of Calculation for Total CVD Risk
Here, we use an example of a man without known CVD who visits his general
practitioner in France.
This man is 53 years old and is not taking any medications. His blood pressure is
146 (systolic)/87 (diastolic) mmHg. According to the most recent laboratory results,
his non-high-density lipoprotein (non-HDL) cholesterol level is 4.3 mmol/L. He is a
non-smoker.
The version of SCORE2 for populations at low CVD risk is used as the patient is
<70 years old and he lives in France, which is a country with low CVD risk.
The illustration below shows the appropriate chart. First, the correct age group
is identified (50–54 years), then the systolic blood pressure group (140–159 mmHg)
and non-HDL cholesterol group (4.0–4.9 mmol/L).
According to this calculation, the patient has an estimated likelihood of 5% of
experiencing a fatal or non-fatal cardiovascular event (such as heart attack or stroke)
in the next 10 years. As such, this person has a moderate CVD risk.
SCORE2 <50 years 50-69 years ≥70 years
10-year risk of (fatal and non-fatal) CV <2.5% <5% <7.5%
2.5 to <7.5% 5 to <10% 7.5 to <15%
events in populations at low CVD risk ≥7.5% ≥10% ≥15%
Women Men
Non-smoking Smoking Non-smoking Smoking
Non-HDL cholesterol
This guide for patients is a simplified version of the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines on
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice. The full guidelines are available
in English on the ESC website (
Practice-Guidelines/2021-ESC-Guidelines-on-cardiovascular-disease-prevention-
in-clinical-practice); your healthcare provider will be familiar with its content and
recommendations. Online translator tools may be able to translate the text and present
it in an alternative language, with limitations. If you are interested in more information
about cardiovascular disease prevention or the terms used in this document, the
Healthy-Heart.org website is a good place to start.
