ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines on The Management of Chronic and Acute Heart Failure:

What Are Clinical Practice Guidelines?
Clinical Practice Guidelines are written by a team of healthcare professionals and
scientists and are mainly intended for healthcare professionals. They provide diagnosis
and treatment recommendations based on medical and scientific evidence to ensure
that patients receive appropriate care.
This document is for patients with heart failure and their caregivers and is based on
the longer European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure.
What Will This Document Tell Me?
This guide for patients aims to provide you with an overview of the latest evidence-
based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of your condition. In
particular, it should help you to understand the:
• main types of heart failure
• medicines you may be offered
• devices that might be considered appropriate
• importance of being treated by a multidisciplinary team
• importance of rehabilitation
• importance of looking after yourself and managing your condition
This document is not intended as a guide on how the heart works, nor can it be
exhaustive. Readers interested in details of the recommendations are kindly referred
to the 2021 ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines and the 2023 Focused Update.1
People seeking more general information about heart failure should visit
www.heartfailurematters.org
If you are a healthcare professional, the ESC hopes that this document, translated
into the language of your patients, will provide them and their caregivers with an
understanding of their diagnosis and treatment as a patient with heart failure.
Please disseminate it widely.
How Will This Document Help Me?
This document is intended to contribute to your understanding of your condition and
give you the knowledge and confidence to be involved in shared decision-making with
your healthcare providers regarding treatment and other aspects of your health. It also
provides suggestions on ways to look after yourself, which is essential in the effective
management of heart failure.
1 

What is Heart Failure?
Heart failure is not a single disease but a ‘syndrome’ made up of symptoms, such as
breathlessness or fatigue, that may appear alongside signs such as swollen ankles,
caused by something wrong in the heart.
Heart failure can be acute (comes on quickly and severely, requiring urgent attention)
or chronic (long-lasting, with the coming-and-going of symptoms). This document
mainly refers to chronic heart failure.
Types of Heart Failure
Heart failure occurs when the pumping action of the heart is impaired. This
impairment may be mild or severe.
Generally, there are three types of chronic heart failure based on the amount of blood
that is pumped out of the heart’s main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, during
each heartbeat. This is known as the ‘left ventricular ejection fraction’.
The three types of chronic heart failure are:
• Heart Failure with reduced Ejection Fraction (HFrEF)
• Heart Failure with mildly reduced Ejection Fraction (HFmrEF)
• Heart Failure with preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF)
HFrEF HFmrEF HFpEF
Left ventricular ≤ 40 (less or equal 41%-49% ≥ 50% (greater or
ejection fraction to) equal to)
Changes in In HFrEF, the heart HFmrEF is between In HFpEF, the heart
heart structure is usually enlarged HFrEF and HFpEF is less enlarged
compared with a than in HFrEF; the
normal heart and left ventricle is
pumping weakly smaller compared
with the HFrEF
heart and stiffened
Changes in The left ventricle fills with higher pressure than is normal.
heart function There is higher pressure in the lungs, veins and liver that can
lead to breathlessness and/or oedema (swelling)

The changes associated with each type of chronic heart failure are shown below:
Left
ventricle
Right
ventricle
Normal heart
Left Left
ventricle Right ventricle
Right
ventricle
ventricle
Weakened
Stiffened
heart muscle
heart muscle
HFrEF HFpEF
Advanced Heart Failure
Advanced heart failure is a development of chronic heart failure when symptoms
cannot be fully controlled despite maximum therapy. This is sometimes referred to as
‘resistance to treatment’.
Advanced heart failure is different from when acute heart failure arises in a patient
with chronic heart failure, which describes the rapid onset of a change in heart
function that requires urgent attention.
Image adapted from: Bloom MW, et al. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017;3:17058. 

Diagnosis of Heart Failure
To be diagnosed with heart failure, you must have symptoms and/or signs of heart
failure as well as abnormalities and functional problems in the heart as seen on tests.
The types of tests and investigations you may have to diagnose your condition are
shown below:
Blood tests, Electrocardiogram (ECG), X-ray Echocardiogram (echo),
such as BNP/ checks electrical activity of ultrasound of the heart
NT-proBNP the heart
These tests will identify which type of heart failure you have (HFrEF, HFmrEF, or HFpEF)
and guide the appropriate course of treatment.
You may need further tests for better evaluation of the features of your heart failure
and how your condition will develop.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan is sometimes used instead of or with
an echo to identify particular characteristics of the heart, including scarring of the
heart muscle.
The types of treatments that you receive will be chosen depending on how much
help your heart needs to function. The more that is known about your diagnosis, the
better your doctors can personalise your treatment options, which may improve your
symptoms and/or outcomes.

Severity Classification of Heart Failure
Following diagnosis, doctors will often classify your condition using the New York
Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classification system, according to the
severity of your symptoms and how they affect your physical activity:
NYHA class Description
Class I No limitation of physical activity. Ordinary physical activity does
not cause excessive symptoms, e.g., breathlessness, fatigue or
palpitations (more noticeable or ‘skipping’ heartbeats)
Class II Slight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but
ordinary physical activity causes excessive symptoms
Class III Significant limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest, but
less than ordinary physical activity causes excessive symptoms
Class IV Unable to do any physical activity without discomfort. Symptoms
can be present even at rest. If any physical activity is done,
discomfort is increased
Hereditary Forms of Heart Failure
Some causes of heart failure, such as a disease of the heart muscle called
cardiomyopathy, may be ‘hereditary’, meaning they can be passed down in your
family. Genetic testing should be considered in people who may have cardiomyopathy
depending on age, family history and heart structure.

Treatment for Heart Failure
Care from a multidisciplinary team (healthcare professionals across different
specialities) is key to meeting the three major goals of treatment for people with
heart failure:
1. longer life
2. prevent hospital stays due to worsening heart failure
3. decrease symptoms and improve quality of life
Some of the ways that you and your multidisciplinary team can help to achieve these
goals are shown below:
Multidisciplinary team
Management
Medication Devices Surgery Lifestyle and
monitoring
Help patients live longer, prevent hospital stays, decrease symptoms and improve quality of life

Medications for People with HFrEF
Medicines are the first treatment for HFrEF and should be started as early as possible,
before devices or other non-medicinal treatments are used.
The ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines currently recommend four different types of
medicines for people with HFrEF: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) or
angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors (ARNI), beta-blockers (BB), mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists (MRA) and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors.
The table below explains how the different medicines work:
Type of medicine What it does
Angiotensin converting enzyme Relax blood vessels and reduce how hard the
inhibitors (ACE-I) heart has to work
Angiotensin receptor neprilysin Work in a similar way to ACE-I (above) and
inhibitors (ARNI) have additional heart-protective effects
Beta-blockers (BB) Slow down the heart so that it doesn’t have
to work as hard, and protect the heart from
future heart attacks
Mineralocorticoid receptor Reduce build-up of fluid and sodium, reducing
antagonists (MRA) scarring of heart muscle, and thus protect
the heart
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 Help remove fluid and sodium, protecting the
(SGLT2) inhibitors heart and kidneys2
You may also receive other types of medications to control your symptoms or improve
your condition, e.g., diuretics (‘water pills’, which help your body get rid of salt
[sodium] and water) are recommended to reduce excess fluid and lower pressures
within the heart.
Medications for People with HFmrEF
Most research into medication for people living with heart failure has been focused
on treatment of people with HFrEF. However, for people living with HFmrEF, the use of
SGLT2 inhibitors has shown benefits and is therefore recommended, as well as use of
diuretics. Other medications used for HFrEF may also help people with HFmrEF.

Medications for People with HFpEF
SGLT2 inhibitors have been shown to help people with HFpEF live longer, prevent
hospital stays, decrease symptoms and improve quality of life and are therefore
recommended, as are diuretics.
Other medications can be used to help relieve symptoms for people with HFpEF.
As most people with HFpEF have underlying high blood pressure and/or coronary
artery disease, many are treated with ACE-I/ angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB),
BB or MRA.
Initiation and Dosage of Heart Failure
Medications
Medicines are the first treatment for all types of heart failure and should be started
as early as possible, before devices or other non-medicinal treatments are used.
When diagnosed with heart failure, it is recommended that you are started on all
medications quickly and their doses be rapidly increased because we know that this
is the best way to improve your symptoms and reduce your risk of dying or going
to hospital.
If you had been admitted to hospital because of heart failure, you may be asked to
return to the clinic for outpatient follow-ups and optimisation of your medication in
the first weeks after discharge.
Managing Heart Failure Alongside Other
Health Conditions
Many people with heart failure also have other health conditions such as diabetes,
kidney disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Your heart failure treatment might be changed if you have one of these conditions,
are pregnant or have another condition such as congenital heart disease.
For people with heart failure and atrial fibrillation, anticoagulants (‘blood thinners’)
are often needed to prevent stroke, and digoxin is sometimes given to slow a high
heart rate.
For people who don’t have enough iron, it is recommended to give an iron infusion
to decrease symptoms, improve quality of life and prevent hospital admissions.

Devices and Surgery for Heart Failure
Devices
Medical devices can help support the heart by using electrical signals to keep it
beating regularly and/or improve how it works.
These devices, placed under the skin near the collarbone, may not only improve
symptoms but have been shown to help people with heart failure live longer.
Three types of devices that may be recommended to you are shown below:
A pacemaker monitors heart rate and sends small and painless electrical
Pacemaker
impulses to the heart to start each heartbeat if needed
An Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) is a pacemaker-like
device that can deliver either a painless electrical impulse or a more
ICD
noticeable shock to the heart to correct the heart rhythm if it senses
a serious problem that could lead to sudden cardiac arrest
A cardiac resynchronisation therapy pacemaker (CRT-P) is a special
CRT-P
type of pacemaker that makes the different parts of the heart pump
/CRT-D
together. It can be combined with an ICD (CRT-D)
People with HFrEF are at increased risk of cardiac arrest, where the heart suddenly
stops pumping.
Pacemakers may be recommended for people with a heartbeat that is too slow or
too fast.
A pacemaker monitors heart rate and sendssm all and painless
People who have recoPvaceermedak ferrom cardiac arrest and those with a history of heart attack
electrical impulses to the heart to start each heartbeat if needed.
are most likely to receive an ICD. In people with other heart disease not related to the
blood vessels of the heart, ICDs are most helpful in those under 70 years old.
An Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) is a pacemaker-like
A cardiac resynchronisatioICnD theradpeyvi c(eC tRhaTt) c adne dveiclivee mr eaithye br ae puasineleds si nel eccetrritcaali nim ppeulosep oler at o
more noticeable shock to the heart to correct the heart rhythm if it
improve heart function and quality of life, depending on the results of an ECG as well as
senses a serious problem that could lead to sudden cardiac arrest.
how well and for how long medications are working.
A cardiac resynchronisation therapy pacemaker (CRT-P) is a
CRT-P
Some of the important steps in stpheeci apl rtoypcee osfs p oacfe rmeackeeirv tihnagt m oark erse tphlea dciiffnegre antn p iamrtsp olaf nted
/CRT-D
device are shown below: the heart pump together. It can be combined with an ICD
If you have a left You should receive A review of You should be evaluated
ventricular ejection education around medications by an experienced
fraction ≤35%, you the purpose (particularly cardiologist before your
should be considered of the device diuretic therapy) device is replaced, in
for an implanted and potential is advised after case management goals
device (ICD or CRT) complications receiving a CRT or needs have changed
Time

Surgery
Some people with underlying cardiac diseases that are causing heart failure will benefit
from surgery or other procedures.
Some of the common surgical or catheter procedures for heart failure, who they are
for, and what they do and how, are listed below:
Procedure/
surgery Who’s it for? What it does and how
Catheter People with worsening heart Restores normal heart rhythm by
ablation failure symptoms due to atrial blocking extra electrical impulses
fibrillation coming into the heart
Coronary People with narrowing of the Diverts blood around narrowed
artery bypass coronary arteries, symptoms parts of the arteries to improve
grafting of angina and left ventricular blood flow and oxygen supply to
ejection fraction ≤35% the heart
Valve repair or People who develop problems Surgery may be done to repair or
replacement with their heart valves, replace the valve. In patients with
including aortic stenosis severe aortic stenosis, surgical or
(narrowing of the opening of catheter replacement of the aortic
the left ventricle) valve is recommended
Mitral valve People who have symptoms Prevents abnormal blood flow
procedures despite medications and between heart chambers
in whom the procedure is
likely to reduce heart failure
hospitalisation
Mechanical People with advanced Implanted device that takes over
circulatory heart failure the pumping function of the
support heart. It can be used until a heart
transplant is available or as a
long-term treatment
Heart People with advanced Optimal treatment for limited
transplantation heart failure group of patients

Lifestyle Modifications for People
with Heart Failure
People with heart failure can make lifestyle modifications to improve their symptoms
and the condition itself.
Your healthcare team should refer you to rehabilitation where you can learn more
about your condition and how to look after yourself.
Looking after yourself is essential in the effective management of heart failure and
you should discuss any lifestyle recommendations with your healthcare team.
Some examples of lifestyle modifications are shown below:
Exercise according Reduce sedentary Maintain a healthy diet
to physical ability habits, cigarettes and body weight
and alcohol
Plan travel and Seek help if Monitor, recognise
leisure activities experiencing and react to changes
according to depression, anxiety in signs/symptoms
physical ability or low mood

Management and Monitoring of
Heart Failure
Regular monitoring is important to maintain symptom control.
You may meet with your healthcare providers in the following ways:
A multidisciplinary team (which combines Regular follow-up is important, even if your
healthcare professionals from different condition is stable. The ESC Clinical Practice
specialities) is recommended to ensure correct Guidelines recommend at least every 6 months
tests, accurate diagnosis and appropriate to check things like heart rhythm, blood pressure
therapy, education and follow-up and kidney function
If you’ve recently been discharged from Telemonitoring, where you may send
hospital, follow-up should be more frequent, information such as your symptoms, weight
including a visit 1–2 weeks after leaving or blood pressure to your healthcare provider,
hospital to check your symptoms and how may be used to adjust treatment or get
well the medications are working further advice
Each person’s experience with heart failure is different; despite the best medications,
devices and surgical treatments, symptoms can get worse.
A supportive approach from all members of your multidisciplinary team can improve
quality of life by balancing medical treatment and symptom control with particular
reference to mental and spiritual wellbeing.