Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management
Overview
This guideline covers investigation and management of heart valve disease presenting in
adults. It aims to improve quality of life and survival for people with heart valve disease
through timely diagnosis and appropriate intervention.
For NHS England and NHS Improvement's position on transcatheter aortic valve
implantation for people at low or intermediate surgical risk, see the implementation
strategy for transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners and providers
• People with heart valve disease, their families and carers

 
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 Referral for echocardiography and specialist
assessment
Referral for echocardiography
1.1.1 Consider an echocardiogram for adults with a murmur and no other signs or
symptoms if valve disease is suspected based on:
• the nature of the murmur
• family history
• age (especially if over 75), or
• medical history (for example, a history of atrial fibrillation).
1.1.2 Offer an echocardiogram to adults with a murmur if valve disease is suspected
(based on the nature of the murmur, family history, age or medical history) and
they have:
• signs (such as peripheral oedema) or symptoms (such as angina or
breathlessness) or an abnormal ECG, or
• an ejection systolic murmur with a reduced second heart sound but no other

 
signs or symptoms.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referral for
echocardiography.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
symptoms and signs indicating need for echocardiography or direct referral to a
specialist.
Referral for urgent specialist assessment or urgent
echocardiography
1.1.3 If valve disease is suspected (based on the nature of the murmur, family history,
age or medical history):
• Offer urgent (within 2 weeks) specialist assessment that includes
echocardiogram or if not available an urgent echocardiogram alone to adults
with a systolic murmur and exertional syncope.
• Consider urgent (within 2 weeks) specialist assessment that includes
echocardiogram for adults with a murmur and severe symptoms (angina or
breathlessness on minimal exertion or at rest) thought to be related to
valvular heart disease.
1.1.4 For guidance on referral and assessment for adults with murmur and non-
exertional syncope, follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on
transient loss of consciousness ('blackouts') in over 16s.
1.1.5 For guidance on referral and assessment for adults with breathlessness but no
murmur, follow the recommendations in the NICE guideline on chronic heart
failure in adults.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referral for urgent
specialist assessment or urgent echocardiography.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
symptoms and signs indicating need for echocardiography or direct referral to a
specialist.
Referral to a specialist after echocardiography
1.1.6 Be aware that mild valve disease is common and rarely progresses to become
clinically significant.
1.1.7 Offer referral to a specialist to:
• adults with moderate or severe valve disease of any type
• adults with bicuspid aortic valve disease of any severity (including mild valve
disease).
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on referral to a
specialist after echocardiography.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
indications for referral to a specialist following echocardiography.
Information, referral and specialist assessment for pregnant
women and women considering pregnancy
1.1.8 Be aware that most women with valve disease can have a pregnancy without
complications.
1.1.9 Offer advice on the implications of treatment choices on any future pregnancy to
women who need heart valve intervention.

 
1.1.10 Offer advice on family planning to women with severe valve disease, particularly
aortic and mitral stenosis.
1.1.11 Refer pregnant women or women who are considering a pregnancy to a
cardiologist with expertise in the care of pregnant women, if they have any of the
following:
• moderate or severe valve disease
• bicuspid aortic valve disease of any severity (including mild disease) and
associated aortopathy
• a prosthetic valve.
Refer whether they have symptoms or not.
1.1.12 Consider seeking specialist advice on the choice of replacement valve if heart
valve replacement surgery is being considered for women of childbearing
potential.
1.1.13 For guidance on intrapartum care, follow the recommendations on heart disease
in the NICE guideline on intrapartum care for women with existing medical
conditions or obstetric complications and their babies.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information,
referral and specialist assessment for pregnant women and women considering a
pregnancy.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
symptoms and signs indicating need for echocardiography or direct referral to a
specialist.

 
1.2 Pharmacological management
Management of heart failure in people with valve disease
1.2.1 Consider a beta-blocker for adults with moderate to severe mitral stenosis and
heart failure.
1.2.2 When adults with heart valve conditions and heart failure also have left
ventricular dysfunction, refer to the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure in
adults.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see rationale and impact section on pharmacological
management of heart failure in heart valve disease.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:
pharmacological management.
1.3 Indications for interventions
1.3.1 Offer an intervention to adults with symptomatic severe heart valve disease.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on indications for
interventions.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.
Aortic stenosis
1.3.2 Consider referring adults with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis for

 
intervention, if suitable, if they have any of the following:
• Vmax (peak aortic jet velocity) more than 5 m/s on echocardiography
• aortic valve area less than 0.6 cm2 on echocardiography
• left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) less than 55%
• B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal proBNP (NT-proBNP) level
more than twice the upper limit of normal
• symptoms unmasked on exercise testing.
1.3.3 Consider referring adults with symptomatic low-gradient aortic stenosis with
LVEF less than 50% for intervention if during dobutamine stress
echocardiography the aortic stenosis is shown to be severe by:
• a mean gradient across the aortic valve that increases to more than
40 mmHg and
• an aortic valve area that remains less than 1 cm2.
1.3.4 Consider measuring aortic valve calcium score on cardiac CT if the severity of
symptomatic aortic stenosis is uncertain.
1.3.5 Offer enhanced follow up (for example, more frequent reviews) and further
assessment (for example, stress echocardiography) to monitor the need for
intervention if mid-wall fibrosis is detected on cardiac MRI in adults with severe
aortic stenosis.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on indications for
interventions for adults with aortic stenosis.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in:
• evidence review D: indications for intervention
• evidence review E: stress testing and stress echocardiography in determining
need for intervention
• evidence review F: CT and MRI indications for intervention.
Aortic regurgitation
1.3.6 Consider referring adults with asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation for
intervention, if suitable, if they have either of the following:
• LVEF less than 55% or
• end systolic diameter (ESD) of more than 50 mm or end systolic diameter
index (ESDI) more than 24 mm/m2 on echocardiography.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on indications for
interventions for adults with aortic regurgitation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
indications for intervention.
Mitral regurgitation
1.3.7 Consider referring adults with asymptomatic severe primary mitral regurgitation
for intervention, if suitable, if they have any of the following:

 
• LVEF less than 60%
• ESD more than 45 mm or ESDI more than 22 mm/m2 on echocardiography or
• an increase of systolic pulmonary artery pressure to more than 60 mmHg on
exercise testing.
When making decisions about referral for surgery, take into account the
suitability of the valve for repair and the presence of atrial fibrillation or
systolic pulmonary artery pressure of more than 50 mmHg on
echocardiography at rest.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on indications for
intervention for adults with mitral regurgitation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
indications for intervention and evidence review E: stress testing and stress
echocardiography in determining need for intervention.
1.4 Monitoring when there is no current need for
intervention
1.4.1 Offer clinical review every 6 to 12 months, with an echocardiogram, to adults with
asymptomatic severe valve disease if an intervention is suitable but not currently
needed. Base the frequency of the review on echocardiography findings and
shared decision making with the patient.
1.4.2 Consider echocardiographic assessment every 3 to 5 years for adults with mild
aortic or mitral stenosis.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on monitoring where
there is no current need for intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:
monitoring of people with heart valve disease and no current indication for
intervention.
1.5 Interventions
See the recommendations on indications for interventions.
Decisions about interventions
1.5.1 Discuss the possible benefits and risks of interventions with adults who have an
indication for valve intervention. Include in the discussion:
• the benefits to quality of life (both in the short and long term)
• prosthetic valve durability
• the risks associated with the procedures
• the type of access for surgery (median sternotomy, minimally invasive
surgery or, for people at high surgical risk, transcatheter)
• the possible need for other cardiac procedures in the future.
Follow the recommendations in the NICE guidelines on shared decision
making and patient experience in adult NHS services and base decisions on
the type of intervention on patient characteristics and preferences.
1.5.2 When surgery is agreed, base the decision on the type of surgery (median
sternotomy or minimally invasive surgery) on patient characteristics and
preferences. If minimally invasive surgery is the agreed option and is not available
locally, refer the person to another centre.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on decisions about
interventions.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.
Aortic valve disease
For NHS England and NHS Improvement's position on transcatheter aortic valve
implantation for people at low or intermediate surgical risk, see the implementation
strategy for transcatheter aortic valve implantation.
1.5.3 Offer surgery, if suitable (by median sternotomy or minimally invasive surgery), as
first-line intervention for adults with severe aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation or
mixed aortic valve disease and an indication for surgery who are at low or
intermediate surgical risk. TAVI is not cost effective for people at low or
intermediate surgical risk at the current list price.
1.5.4 Offer TAVI, if suitable, to adults with non-bicuspid severe aortic stenosis who are
at high surgical risk or if surgery is unsuitable.
1.5.5 See the recommendations on using TAVI in the NICE interventional procedures
guidance on transcatheter aortic valve implantation for aortic stenosis, including
entering the details of all people undergoing TAVI into the UK TAVI registry. See
also the NICE interventional procedures guidance on sutureless aortic valve
replacement in aortic stenosis and balloon valvuloplasty for aortic valve stenosis.
See NHS England's clinical commissioning policy on transcatheter aortic valve implantation
for aortic stenosis.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions for
aortic valve disease.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.
Mitral stenosis
1.5.6 Consider transcatheter valvotomy for adults with rheumatic severe mitral
stenosis, if the valve is suitable for this procedure.
1.5.7 Offer surgical mitral valve replacement to adults with rheumatic severe mitral
stenosis if transcatheter valvotomy is unsuitable.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions for
mitral stenosis.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.
Mitral regurgitation
Primary mitral regurgitation
1.5.8 Offer surgical mitral valve repair (by median sternotomy or minimally invasive
surgery) to adults with severe primary mitral regurgitation and an indication for
repair, if surgery is suitable.
1.5.9 Offer surgical mitral valve replacement (by median sternotomy or minimally
invasive surgery) to adults with severe primary mitral regurgitation and an

 
indication for surgery, if the valve is not suitable for repair and surgery is suitable.
1.5.10 Consider transcatheter edge-to-edge repair, if suitable, for adults with severe
primary mitral regurgitation and symptoms, if surgery is unsuitable.
See NHS England's clinical commissioning policy on percutaneous mitral valve leaflet
repair for primary degenerative mitral regurgitation in adults and the NICE interventional
procedures guidance on percutaneous mitral valve leaflet repair for mitral regurgitation
and thoracoscopically assisted mitral valve surgery.
Secondary mitral regurgitation
1.5.11 Consider surgical mitral valve repair (by median sternotomy or minimally invasive
surgery) for adults with severe secondary mitral regurgitation who are having
cardiac surgery for another indication, if surgery is suitable.
1.5.12 Consider surgical mitral valve replacement (by median sternotomy or minimally
invasive surgery) for adults with severe secondary mitral regurgitation who are
having cardiac surgery for another indication, if the valve is not suitable for repair
and surgery is suitable.
1.5.13 Offer medical management to adults with heart failure and severe secondary
mitral regurgitation, if surgery is unsuitable.
1.5.14 Consider transcatheter mitral edge-to-edge repair for adults with heart failure
and severe secondary mitral regurgitation, if surgery is unsuitable and they
remain symptomatic on medical management.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions for
mitral regurgitation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.

 
Tricuspid regurgitation
1.5.15 Consider surgical tricuspid valve repair at the time of mitral valve surgery when
tricuspid regurgitation is moderate or severe.
1.5.16 Consider surgical tricuspid valve repair at the time of aortic valve surgery when
tricuspid regurgitation is severe.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on interventions for
tricuspid regurgitation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.
1.6 Repeat intervention
1.6.1 Consider transcatheter or redo surgical intervention for adults with severe aortic
degeneration of a biological prosthetic valve and symptoms. Take into account
the following factors to inform a shared decision about the choice of intervention:
• the short- and long-term benefits
• type of valve dysfunction and prosthesis
• the risks associated with the procedure
• the possible need for other cardiac procedures in the future.
See the NICE interventional procedures guidance on using transapical
transcatheter mitral valve-in-valve implantation for a failed surgically
implanted mitral valve bioprosthesis, transapical transcatheter mitral valve-
in-ring implantation after failed annuloplasty for mitral valve repair and valve-
in-valve TAVI for aortic bioprosthetic dysfunction.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see rationale and impact section on repeat intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I:
repeat intervention for failure of biological or repaired valves.
1.7 Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy
1.7.1 Do not offer anticoagulation after surgical biological valve replacement unless
there are other indications for anticoagulation.
1.7.2 Consider aspirin, or clopidogrel if aspirin is not tolerated, after TAVI.
1.7.3 If people have other indications for anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy, follow
the recommendations in the NICE guidelines on atrial fibrillation and acute
coronary syndromes.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on anticoagulation
and antiplatelet therapy.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review J:
anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet therapy for biological prosthetic valves and after
valve repair.
1.8 Monitoring after an intervention
1.8.1 Base decisions on the frequency and type of monitoring for adults who have had
an intervention (valve repair or replacement) for valve disease on:
• durability of the prosthetic valve or durability of the repair
• the presence of another condition, including other heart disease
• residual valve abnormality or consequences of the procedure, for example,

 
paravalvular leak
• concerns about abnormal function of the prosthetic valve
• the patient's wishes.
Advise people and their family members or carers (as appropriate) to seek
advice if the heart condition deteriorates.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on monitoring after an
intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K:
monitoring in people with repaired or replaced heart valves.
1.9 Information and advice
1.9.1 Follow the NICE guideline on shared decision making and the recommendations
in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS services on:
• involvement of family members and carers
• communication
• information
• tailoring healthcare services.
1.9.2 Consider providing a point of contact for accessing specialist advice between
appointments.
1.9.3 Be aware of the psychological impact on the person receiving a diagnosis of
valve disease, whether or not they have symptoms. Consider the person's needs
for additional information and support.
1.9.4 Provide information and advice to adults with valve disease about:

 
• the expected progression and prognosis of their condition, including the
likely length of an asymptomatic stage
• any need for intervention, including the type of intervention
• pregnancy, if appropriate
• the possible effects of other conditions on long-term outcomes
• rehabilitation and long-term outcomes
• palliative care, if appropriate, including how to access this.
1.9.5 Provide information and support to young adults about transition from paediatric
to adult services, in line with the NICE guideline on transition from children's to
adults' services for young people using health or social care services.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and
advice.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L:
information and advice.
Terms used in this guideline
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline.
Degenerated
Degenerated covers progressive degeneration and does not include failure of the valve
due to endocarditis or thrombosis.
Risk of surgery
This is calculated using EuroSCORE II. People have low surgical risk if they score less than
4%, intermediate risk if they score between 4% and 8% and high risk if they score more

 
than 8%.
Severe valve disease
Severity of valve disease is defined in line with the British Society of Echocardiography
guidelines on the assessment of aortic stenosis, the tricuspid and pulmonary valves, and
mitral valve disease.
Specialist assessment and advice
This could include assessment and advice from a cardiologist with expertise in heart valve
disease, a multidisciplinary team or a heart valve clinic.
Suitability for transcatheter aortic valve implantation
Suitability for transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) depends on:
• an appropriate access for inserting the TAVI catheter
• the morphology of the valve, aortic root and ascending aorta
• the degree and distribution of calcium in the aortic valve.
It is an option for:
• All people expected to have an unacceptably high risk of mortality or morbidity as a
result of surgery (for example, because of a risk of infection in people who are
immunosuppressed). See also the definition of high risk of surgery according to
EuroSCORE II.
• All people expected to have unacceptably strenuous and prolonged recovery from
surgery and an extended need for rehabilitation because of frailty, reduced mobility, or
musculoskeletal conditions.
• All people with low life expectancy, either because of their age or because they have
life-limiting comorbidities.

 
Suitability for transcatheter edge-to-edge repair
Suitability for transcatheter edge-to-edge repair depends on:
• the morphology of the person's valve
• the feasibility of using transoesophageal echocardiography to guide the procedure
• the person's fitness for general anaesthesia.

 
Recommendations for research
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
Key recommendations for research
1 Monitoring when there is no current need for intervention
What is the most clinically and cost-effective monitoring (type and frequency of test) for
adults with asymptomatic mild or moderate heart valve disease (aortic stenosis, aortic
regurgitation, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation) and no
current need for intervention?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on monitoring where there is no current need for
intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:
monitoring of people with heart valve disease and no current indication for
intervention.
2 Interventions for tricuspid regurgitation
What is the most clinically and cost-effective management strategy for adults with
tricuspid regurgitation?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on interventions for tricuspid regurgitation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
transcatheter intervention, surgery or conservative management in heart valve
disease.

 
3 Interventions for a failed valve
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with
surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic tricuspid valves or
failing repaired native tricuspid valves when either procedure is suitable?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on repeat intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I:
repeat intervention for failure of biological or repaired valves.
4 Monitoring after an intervention
What is the most clinically and cost-effective timing, nature and frequency of follow up for
different types of valve interventions, including repair and replacement with tissue or
mechanical valves?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see rationale section on monitoring after an intervention.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K:
monitoring in people with repaired or replaced heart valves.
5 Information and advice
What are the information and advice needs of all adult age groups with heart valve disease
of all severities and stages?
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale section on information and advice.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L:
information and advice.

 
Other recommendations for research
6 Indications for interventions – stress testing or
echocardiography
What is the prognostic value of severe mitral regurgitation unmasked on exercise
echocardiography in adults with symptomatic non-severe mitral regurgitation at rest?
What is the prognostic value of parameters observed on exercise stress testing and
exercise stress echocardiography in asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation?
7 Indications for interventions – CT or MRI
In adults with aortic or primary mitral regurgitation in whom the need for intervention is
unclear after echocardiography, what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of
cardiac MRI to assess the severity of valvular regurgitation?
In adults with aortic or mitral regurgitation in whom the need for intervention is unclear
after echocardiography, what is the prognostic value and cost effectiveness of left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) measured on cardiac MRI to assess the need for
intervention?
In adults with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis what is the prognostic value and cost
effectiveness of LVEF measured on cardiac MRI to assess the need for intervention?
In adults with asymptomatic severe tricuspid regurgitation what is the prognostic value
and cost effectiveness of cardiac MRI for assessment of the right ventricle to assess the
need for intervention?
8 Indications for interventions – global longitudinal strain
In adults with severe heart valve disease what is the prognostic value and cost
effectiveness of global longitudinal strain to assess the need for intervention?
In adults with asymptomatic, severe aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation what is the
prognostic value and cost effectiveness of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) to assess the
need for intervention?

 
9 Pharmacological management for adults with heart valve
disease
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
antagonists, beta-blockers and diuretics for adults with severe aortic stenosis?
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
antagonists, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers, including compared with
placebo, for adults with aortic regurgitation?
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
antagonists, beta-blockers and diuretics for adults with primary severe mitral
regurgitation?
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of beta-blockers for adults over 75 years with
non-rheumatic/calcific mitral stenosis, in both sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation?
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of pharmacological management of heart failure
for adults with heart failure and severe aortic stenosis, severe aortic regurgitation or
severe mitral regurgitation?
10 Monitoring when there is no current need for intervention
What is the most clinically and cost-effective monitoring strategy (type and frequency of
test) for adults with asymptomatic severe heart valve disease (aortic regurgitation, mitral
stenosis, mitral regurgitation or tricuspid regurgitation) and no current indication for
intervention?
What is the most clinically and cost-effective monitoring strategy (type and frequency of
test) for adults with symptomatic moderate heart valve disease (aortic stenosis, aortic
regurgitation, mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation) and no
current indication for intervention?
11 Interventions
What is the most clinically and cost-effective management strategy for adults with calcific
mitral stenosis and an indication for intervention?

 
12 Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of single or dual antiplatelet therapies or
anticoagulants compared with placebo after transcatheter or surgical valve replacement
(implantation) with biological prosthesis and after valve repair?
In adults with biological valve replacement, what effect does anticoagulation or antiplatelet
therapy have on long-term valve function and outcomes?
13 Repeat interventions
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with
surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic aortic valves when
either procedure is suitable?
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of transcatheter intervention compared with
surgical redo intervention for adults with failing biological prosthetic mitral valves when
either procedure is suitable?

 
Rationale and impact
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the recommendations and how
they might affect practice.
Referral for echocardiography
Recommendations 1.1.1 and 1.1.2
Why the committee made the recommendations
Murmur alone
Limited evidence showed that murmur is an indicator of valve disease. But the evidence
also showed that a substantial proportion of people with a murmur do not have valve
disease confirmed by a reference test. The committee agreed that 'innocent' murmurs can
occur, particularly during the teenage and young adult years and in pregnancy. These are
difficult to differentiate from pathological murmurs by clinical examination alone. The
evidence was not strong enough to recommend that everyone with a murmur should be
referred for echocardiography. The committee agreed that this would be a change in
practice, would increase pressure on echocardiography services and would offer uncertain
benefit. However, when the nature of the murmur, family history, age or medical history
suggest possible valve disease, echocardiography should be considered to establish a
diagnosis.
Systolic murmur with a reduced second heart sound
Evidence suggested that the presence of a systolic heart murmur plus a reduced second
heart sound had good specificity for aortic stenosis confirmed by echocardiography. The
recommendation specifies ejection systolic murmur because this, combined with a
reduced second heart sound, is a classic indicator of aortic stenosis and is most often
present in severe aortic stenosis. Although this was based on only a few studies, the
committee agreed that people with these features should be referred for
echocardiography. Because of the limited evidence identified, this recommendation was
limited to those in whom heart valve disease was considered a possible explanation of

 
these signs based on the nature of the murmur, family history, age or medical history.
Murmur with other symptoms or signs
Studies showed that echocardiography detected valve disease in a higher proportion of
people with murmur plus other signs and symptoms (abnormal ECG, angina,
breathlessness, peripheral oedema) than in people with murmur alone. That is, murmur
plus other signs or symptoms had a higher specificity for echocardiography confirmed
valve disease. Again, this was based on a few studies only, so the committee agreed that
the nature of the murmur, family history, age or medical history should also suggest valve
disease as a possibility.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations reflect current practice.
Return to recommendations
Referral for urgent specialist assessment or urgent
echocardiography
Recommendations 1.1.3 to 1.1.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence showed that more cases of severe valve disease were picked up when a murmur
plus other signs or symptoms were present. The committee agreed that mild and
moderate valve disease does not usually present with these symptoms and using these
criteria for referral would not result in unnecessary referral for urgent specialist
assessment or echocardiography in most cases.
People with exertional syncope and a systolic murmur need an urgent diagnosis because
exertional syncope caused by aortic stenosis has a high risk of a poor outcome. The
diagnosis must be made quickly to allow appropriate management, which would likely
include intervention if severe aortic stenosis is confirmed. Depending on local availability,
an echocardiogram may be faster than direct specialist referral, which would include
echocardiography, so the committee agreed to recommend either for this group. The

 
committee agreed that the assessment or echocardiogram should be done within 2 weeks.
For people with severe symptoms (New York Heart Association classification III to IV or
perceived by the person as severe) and a murmur, but without exertional syncope, the
committee agreed that urgent specialist assessment within 2 weeks, which would include
echocardiography, should be considered.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations reflect current practice.
Return to recommendations
Referral to a specialist after echocardiography
Recommendations 1.1.6 and 1.1.7
Why the committee made the recommendations
Across the included studies, moderate and severe valve disease was consistently
associated with more adverse outcomes than 'mild' or 'mild and moderate' valve disease.
Despite limited evidence for each specific type of valve disease, the committee agreed
that specialist referral should be offered to those with moderate or severe disease. This is
consistent with current practice.
The evidence could not be used to recommend that people with mild valve disease should
never be referred to a specialist, because outcomes were not compared with those
without valve disease. However, the committee stressed that patients and healthcare
professionals should be aware that mild valve disease is very common in people over 70, it
seldom causes symptoms and does not progress in most cases. The committee
recommended that people with bicuspid aortic valve disease of any severity (including
mild disease) should be offered specialist referral because its progression is different to
other types of valve disease, it can be associated with aortopathy and in practice is
usually referred.

 
How the recommendations might affect practice
The committee agreed that it is current practice for everyone with moderate or severe
valve disease to be referred to a specialist, regardless of the type of disease and whether
it is primary or secondary. The recommendation on moderate and severe valve disease
would therefore not lead to a change in practice.
For mild valve disease, there is currently variation in specialist referral, with some
unnecessary referrals being made. Although the recommendation does not preclude
referral for this group, it may reassure individuals with mild valve disease, reduce the
number of unnecessary referrals and be cost saving. The recommendations covering
bicuspid aortic valve disease were considered to reflect current practice.
Return to recommendations
Information, referral and specialist assessment for
pregnant women and women considering
pregnancy
Recommendations 1.1.8 to 1.1.13
Why the committee made the recommendations
The committee recognised that the proportion of pregnant women with valve disease is
small compared with the number of women with valve disease who may be considering
pregnancy. These women need to carefully consider the impact of treatment on any future
pregnancy and should be given advice before making a treatment decision. This should
include advice on contraception and planned pregnancy for women with severe valve
disease, and consideration of the type of valve they receive if surgery is performed. It may
be appropriate for their clinician to seek specialist advice to inform this decision from a
cardiologist with expertise in the care of pregnant women. The committee noted that
healthcare professionals without specialist expertise may inappropriately advise women
against becoming pregnant. They agreed that some women with valve disease who may
wish to become pregnant or who are pregnant should be referred to a cardiologist with
specialist expertise. The committee highlighted that only women with moderate or severe
disease on echocardiography, bicuspid aortic valve disease with associated aortopathy or
prosthetic valves need referral. Women with mild disease, for example, aortic regurgitation

 
or mitral valve prolapse without regurgitation, do not need a referral. The committee
acknowledged that an ejection systolic flow murmur is present in most pregnant women
and is not a cause for concern. They also noted that there is no official subspecialty or
national accreditation for cardiologists with a specialist interest in pregnancy.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The committee acknowledged that it is not current practice to refer women who are
considering pregnancy to a cardiologist with specialist expertise. Although moderate or
severe heart valve disease is relatively rare in women of childbearing age, they still
represent an important group of patients. Healthcare centres offering specialised support
to women considering pregnancy are not widespread, so the committee expect a
moderate change in practice in those centres.
Return to recommendations
Pharmacological management to improve
prognosis
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was no evidence that pharmacological management can slow the progression of
heart valve disease, only evidence that statins improve prognosis in aortic stenosis. The
evidence showed that statins reduced cardiac mortality compared with placebo for adults
with aortic stenosis. The committee agreed that this benefit is because of an improvement
in overall cardiovascular health rather than a direct effect on the aortic stenosis.
Therefore, no recommendation was made and statins should be used in line with the NICE
guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid
modification.
There was not enough evidence for the committee to make recommendations on
pharmacological management of other conditions (for example, systemic hypertension) in
people who also have heart valve disease.
The committee decided to make recommendations for research to inform pharmacological
management using common treatments (ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
antagonists, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers and diuretics) in adults with aortic

 
stenosis, aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation. These are important areas of
uncertainty in current UK clinical practice.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice, so the committee agreed there is unlikely
to be a significant resource impact.
Pharmacological management of heart failure in
heart valve disease
Recommendations 1.2.1 and 1.2.2
Why the committee made the recommendation
Some evidence showed that beta-blockers reduced hospital stay for heart failure and
increased exercise tolerance compared with usual care in adults with mitral stenosis. As
with all other indications for beta-blockers, some adults with mitral stenosis stopped
beta-blockers because of adverse events (weakness, dizziness and shortness of breath).
But the committee agreed that in their experience these medicines offer overall benefit for
people with moderate to severe mitral stenosis and heart failure.
The studies included younger people than in UK clinical practice, with mitral stenosis often
being because of rheumatic fever. Patients also had atrial fibrillation. The committee
agreed to make a recommendation for research to inform future use of beta-blockers for
older adults with non-rheumatic calcific mitral stenosis, which is currently more common in
the UK than rheumatic mitral stenosis, in sinus rhythm or atrial fibrillation.
Although a recommendation to consider beta-blockers in people with moderate to severe
mitral stenosis and heart failure was made, there was not enough evidence for the
committee to make recommendations on the use of beta-blockers in other types of heart
valve disease. Similarly, there was not enough evidence to make recommendations on
other drugs for the management of heart failure in heart valve disease. They agreed to
make a recommendation for research on the pharmacological management of heart failure
in adults with severe aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, and mitral regurgitation.

 
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice, so the committee agreed there is unlikely
to be a significant resource impact.
Return to recommendations
Indications for interventions
Recommendation 1.3.1
Why the committee made the recommendation
Severe symptomatic heart valve disease has a poor prognosis and there is no treatment
for the symptoms other than an intervention on the valve. Because of this, the committee
recommended that an intervention should be offered to this group. The evidence to
support this recommendation is discussed under the different types of valve disease in the
section on intervention.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice.
Return to the recommendation
Indications for interventions for adults with aortic
stenosis
Recommendations 1.3.2 to 1.3.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
Echocardiography
A peak aortic jet velocity more than 5 m/s was a risk factor for increased mortality
(all-cause and cardiac or cardiovascular) and sudden death in people with asymptomatic

 
severe aortic stenosis who had not had a valve intervention. An aortic valve area less than
0.6 cm2 was also associated with increased all-cause mortality, both before and after
valve intervention in adults with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis.
A left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) less than 55% was the best marker of early
myocardial decompensation, being linked to increased mortality in adults with
asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis.
Raised B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), particularly when 2 to 3 times the normal level,
was a risk factor for all-cause mortality, before and after valve intervention, for people with
asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis and a preserved ejection fraction. The committee
agreed that this would also apply to N-terminal proBNP (NT-proBNP), which is more widely
used currently in the UK than BNP.
Some of these indicators were broadly in line with current practice and the experience of
the committee. In addition, the evidence for increased mortality was strong, including for
BNP. Therefore, the committee agreed that these indicators of poorer prognosis should
prompt a discussion about the possible need for referral for intervention in people with
asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis. Recommendations were limited to considering
referral because the evidence was low to very low quality.
There was some evidence of increased mortality in people with asymptomatic severe
aortic stenosis and a global longitudinal strain less than 14.7% or 15%, even when ejection
fraction was preserved. However, there is some concern about reproducibility of
measurements. The committee agreed that further research in this area would help to
inform future guidance, so they made a recommendation for research.
Stress testing and stress echocardiography
Despite limitations in the quality of the evidence, the committee agreed that there was
enough to show that symptoms revealed during exercise testing predict a poor outcome in
people with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis. They noted that some people may not
report symptoms because they have adapted, for example, by reducing their activity.
Exercise testing may therefore reveal these symptoms, which is an indication for
intervention.
There was evidence from 2 studies, but with limitations, that no increase in valve area on
dobutamine stress testing was associated with worse outcome in symptomatic low-flow

 
low-gradient aortic stenosis. Point estimates and confidence intervals from both studies
were consistent with this being a risk factor for poor outcome. Severe aortic stenosis is
suggested if a person with low-gradient aortic stenosis has an LVEF less than 50% and a
valve area less than 1 cm2 at rest. Based on the evidence and the committee's experience,
this can be confirmed on dobutamine stress testing if their valve area stays below 1 cm2
and their mean gradient rises above 40 mmHg. This would therefore be an indication for
intervention.
Cardiac MRI and cardiac CT
The evidence showed that a higher aortic valve calcium score measured by cardiac CT
indicates a worse prognosis for people with aortic stenosis. This could be because it is an
index of the severity of aortic stenosis or because it is a marker of more widespread
vascular disease. This was supported by the knowledge and experience of the committee,
who noted that a more calcified aortic valve is associated with more severe aortic
stenosis. However, the mechanism of aortic stenosis in bicuspid aortic valves or in
rheumatic disease is different, and cardiac CT would not be as relevant for monitoring
valve calcium.
Most of the evidence suggested that myocardial fibrosis was associated with increased
risk of a poor outcome in severe aortic stenosis. This was in line with the committee's
experience that myocardial fibrosis in general, not only in aortic stenosis, is associated
with a worse prognosis. Furthermore, myocardial fibrosis in people with severe aortic
stenosis indicates early decompensation and the possible need for early intervention to
stop progression, because mid-wall fibrosis cannot be reversed or improved by
intervention. The committee agreed that follow up should be enhanced and further
assessment should be offered in those with mid-wall fibrosis to check for symptoms and
enable earlier aortic valve intervention to improve prognosis.
How the recommendations might affect practice
These recommendations largely reflect current best practice, although there is local
variation and not all healthcare professionals will know that all of these thresholds should
lead to referral for intervention.
However, the threshold of LVEF less than 55% does represent a change from current
practice, because some centres use a threshold of less than 50%. However, for most
adults this will mean earlier rather than additional intervention, with subsequent

 
improvement in survival and quality of life.
Cardiac MRI is not currently used by all centres to assess aortic stenosis. The
recommendation to consider enhanced follow up and further assessment if mid-wall
fibrosis is detected by cardiac MRI should not mean a change in practice because it will be
implemented only when cardiac MRI data is available.
Return to recommendations
Indications for intervention for adults with aortic
regurgitation
Recommendation 1.3.6
Why the committee made the recommendation
Echocardiography
The committee agreed that it is established practice to consider intervention for people
with severe aortic regurgitation and reduced cardiac function. Severity is defined in line
with British Society of Echocardiography guidelines. People with aortic regurgitation are
often younger than people with other types of valve disease and benefit from timely
intervention.
Evidence showed that when LVEF was less than 55%, the risk of cardiovascular mortality
or heart failure after intervention was higher. End systolic diameter index (ESDI) is also a
measure of systolic dysfunction. Evidence showed an increased risk of left ventricular
systolic dysfunction or death when ESDI was more than 24 mm/m2. The committee agreed
that either of these 2 indicators of early myocardial decompensation should prompt
discussion of possible intervention for asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation.
Recommendations were limited because of the evidence included being low to very low
quality.
There was not enough evidence to include BNP level as an indicator for referral for
intervention for people with asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation. The committee
agreed to make a recommendation for research to inform future practice.

 
Stress testing and stress echocardiography
No evidence was identified for stress testing and stress echocardiography in adults with
asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation. The committee agreed that further research
could answer questions about when to intervene in this population. Therefore, they made
a recommendation for research to identify prognostic factors in this population on stress
testing.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation is in line with current practice.
Return to recommendation
Indications for intervention for adults with mitral
regurgitation
Recommendation 1.3.7
Why the committee made the recommendation
Echocardiography
Evidence showed that an LVEF less than 60% was a risk factor for increased cardiac
mortality after intervention for asymptomatic severe mitral regurgitation. An ESDI greater
than 22 mm/m2 was associated with onset of symptoms, left ventricular dysfunction, or
death without intervention. This is broadly equivalent to the non-indexed ESD threshold of
45 mm used in current practice. The committee agreed that either of these indicators of
early myocardial decompensation should prompt consideration of an intervention for
people with asymptomatic severe mitral regurgitation. Recommendations were limited to
considering an intervention because the evidence was low to very low quality. The
evidence on valve morphology, atrial fibrillation and pulmonary hypertension was not
robust enough to include these as independent indicators for referral for intervention.
However, the evidence suggested that these were associated with increased mortality, so
the committee agreed their presence should be considered when discussing the
possibility of intervention.

 
There was not enough evidence to include BNP level as an indicator for referral for
intervention for people with asymptomatic severe mitral regurgitation. The committee
agreed to make a recommendation for research to inform future practice.
Stress testing and stress echocardiography
Evidence from 2 studies showed that an increase of systolic pulmonary artery pressure
(SPAP) to more than 60 mmHg on exercise was associated with worse outcomes in people
with mitral regurgitation (asymptomatic or asymptomatic/mildly symptomatic, moderate or
severe). This agreed with the committee's experience. Although there is limited evidence
that in severe mitral regurgitation, intervening before symptoms develop results in better
outcomes, the committee agreed that this may be better. Evidence from 1 study showed
that SPAP above 60 mmHg on exercise was associated with symptoms developing during
follow up.
There was not enough evidence for the committee to make a recommendation about
symptomatic non-severe mitral regurgitation. The single small study identified suggested
that an increase in effective regurgitant orifice area of 13 mm2 or more on exercise may
indicate a worse outcome for this group. But the committee were not confident in this
result and so made a recommendation for research to inform future practice.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation largely reflects current best practice, although there is local variation
and not all healthcare professionals will know that all of these thresholds should lead to
referral for intervention.
Return to recommendation
Monitoring when there is no current need for
intervention
Recommendations 1.4.1 and 1.4.2
Why the committee made the recommendations
A single study from the US suggested that regular monitoring for people with severe

 
asymptomatic aortic stenosis reduced all-cause mortality and hospital admission for heart
failure. However, the study had limitations, including lack of applicability to UK clinical
practice.
The committee discussed that although frequency of monitoring currently varies in the UK,
it is usually every 6 to 12 months. Some adults find 6-monthly monitoring reassuring. For
others this leads to anxiety and they would prefer less frequent monitoring (for example,
every 12 months). The committee agreed that the exact frequency of monitoring within the
6-month to 12-month timeframe should be determined by echocardiography results and
shared decision making with the patient. Monitoring less often than every 12 months
would be likely to lead to negative outcomes for the patient because valve changes in this
group occur over months rather than years. However, monitoring less often than every
12 months may be suitable for a minority of patients who have demonstrated stability over
several years. The recommendation covers all types of asymptomatic severe valve
disease.
In line with current practice, echocardiographic assessment every 3 to 5 years should be
considered for adults with mild aortic or mitral stenosis. This would help to identify people
with asymptomatic disease that has become more severe and for whom intervention may
be appropriate.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations are in line with current practice.
Return to recommendations
Decisions about interventions
Recommendations 1.5.1 and 1.5.2
Why the committee made the recommendations
The committee highlighted the importance of shared decision making when discussing
interventions. This is to ensure that treatment options are fully explored, along with their
risks and benefits. Specifically, the committee highlighted valve durability, the risks
associated with the procedure, and the possible need for other cardiac procedures in the

 
future.
The committee agreed that in their clinical experience there was no difference between
minimally invasive and standard surgery replacement in terms of outcomes when done by
those with expertise in minimally invasive surgery. The decision should be based on
patient characteristics and preferences. A lack of expertise in minimally invasive surgery
locally should not be used as a reason for not performing a minimally invasive procedure.
Adults should be referred to a centre where this expertise is available if the procedure is
agreed as most suitable. The evidence to support this recommendation is reported under
the different types of valve disease.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations are expected to have a very small impact on current practice.
Minimally invasive surgery will not be suitable for many patients. Those for whom it is
suitable may still decide to have standard surgery after considering the possible benefits
and risks of both options.
Return to recommendations
Interventions for aortic valve disease
Recommendations 1.5.3 to 1.5.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
Aortic stenosis when surgery is suitable
Evidence from 8 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) showed no large or clear differences
for most outcomes between transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) and surgery for
adults with non-bicuspid aortic stenosis, including mortality outcomes and quality of life.
However, a benefit of TAVI was identified for major bleeding and atrial fibrillation at
30 days, and length of hospital stay after the intervention. Absolute effects for other
outcomes also suggested a benefit, but there was more uncertainty based on the
confidence intervals. A harm of TAVI was identified for pacemaker implantation at 30 days.
Although absolute effects also suggested a possible harm of TAVI in terms of mortality and
rehospitalisation, the direction and size of the effect was much more uncertain for these

 
outcomes and no clear difference between the 2 groups could be identified.
Only 1 study reported data beyond 5 years, but only for all-cause mortality. The health
economic model developed as part of the guideline looked for cost effectiveness over a
lifetime. Therefore, it included evidence about the impact of complications in the long
term, beyond 5 years, given the longer life expectancy for younger people with lower
surgical risk. The results of the health economic model showed that TAVI at current prices
was cost effective for people at high risk of surgery but not for people at low or
intermediate risk. The committee agreed that if surgery is an option, it should be offered to
those with severe aortic stenosis who are low or intermediate risk. Although all of the
evidence identified was for non-bicuspid aortic stenosis, it was agreed that the
recommendation should also apply to bicuspid aortic stenosis, because suitability of
surgery does not depend on the type of aortic stenosis. TAVI is also considered to be more
difficult in bicuspid aortic stenosis.
Aortic stenosis when surgery is unsuitable
Evidence showed benefits for TAVI for people with inoperable non-bicuspid severe aortic
stenosis compared with pharmacological management at 1 to 5 years. These included
benefits in all-cause mortality, cardiac mortality, need for another intervention during
follow up, and hospital admission. However, at 30 days TAVI was associated with
increased mortality, stroke or transient ischaemic attack, major bleeding, and major
vascular complications. The committee noted that TAVI is the only intervention available
for some people with symptomatic severe aortic stenosis. They agreed that
pharmacological management is not sufficient to help symptoms in severe aortic stenosis
and for some aortic stenosis can be fatal without an intervention. TAVI can improve
outcomes in many cases. Two UK-based studies indicated that TAVI offers a good balance
of benefits and costs in adults who cannot have surgery. The committee agreed to
recommend TAVI, if suitable, for those with non-bicuspid severe aortic stenosis if surgery
is unsuitable. TAVI is the only option for this group and was deemed cost effective in this
population.
All of the evidence identified was for non-bicuspid aortic stenosis. TAVI is considered to
be more difficult for bicuspid aortic stenosis and the committee could not extrapolate the
evidence to cover this population.

 
Invasiveness of surgery
Evidence was identified from 14 RCTs comparing minimally invasive surgery for aortic
valve replacement with standard surgery by median sternotomy across different aortic
valve disease populations. Some harms of minimally invasive surgery were observed, and
1 health economic study suggested that minimally invasive surgery was less cost effective
than median sternotomy. However, the RCTs were small and a small number of events
were observed for many outcomes. The health economic study was limited for the same
reasons because it was based on 1 of the RCTs and was limited to a 12-month time-
horizon. Although the committee agreed it is likely there would not be a large difference in
outcomes after 12 months, this may be too short to draw conclusions about cost
effectiveness over a lifetime. The committee highlighted that in their experience there was
no difference between minimally invasive surgery and median sternotomy when done by
those with expertise. The committee were also aware of certain advantages of minimally
invasive surgery, for example, smaller incisions. The committee agreed not to limit the use
of minimally invasive surgery and to recommend a choice with the decision based on
patient characteristics and preferences. A lack of expertise in minimally invasive surgery
locally should not be used as a reason for not performing a minimally invasive procedure
and adults should be referred to a centre where there is expertise if this procedure is
agreed as most suitable.
Despite no direct evidence for bicuspid aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation (bicuspid or
non-bicuspid) and mixed aortic valve disease (aortic stenosis and regurgitation in the
same person), the committee agreed that the type of aortic valve disease would not affect
decisions about the invasiveness of surgery and the evidence could be extrapolated to
any aortic valve disease.
How the recommendations might affect practice
TAVI for non-bicuspid aortic stenosis when surgery is unsuitable
The committee agreed that the use of TAVI is increasing, particularly when surgery is
unsuitable and there are no other options for interventional procedures. It would be rare
not to perform TAVI in these circumstances, but palliative care with pharmacological
management is sometimes agreed. Therefore, the committee considered that the
recommendation would represent a minimal change in practice and would not increase the
number of TAVI procedures.

 
Surgery for aortic stenosis when this is suitable
The committee agreed that TAVI is usually reserved for when surgery is unsuitable or
carries high risks of mortality. But data from the UK TAVI registry suggests that in recent
years the procedure has been expanded to groups of people with lower surgical risk. The
recommendation to offer TAVI to those with high surgical risk should have a moderate
impact, as only 1.9% of surgeries are currently done in this group.
The recommendation to offer surgery instead of TAVI to those with intermediate and low
surgical risk should increase the number of surgeries and reduce TAVIs in this group. This
will ultimately improve NHS efficiency.
Minimally invasive surgery or median sternotomy for aortic valve disease
Data suggests that between 5% and 10% of surgical isolated aortic valve replacements are
done by minimally invasive surgery. If the recommendation leads to an increase in the
number of aortic valve replacements being done by minimally invasive surgery, this could
represent an important change in practice. There may be no increase in the short term, as
more training in these procedures will be needed, but only in the long term when more
centres will have the expertise and capacity of offering minimally invasive surgery.
Return to recommendations
Interventions for mitral stenosis
Recommendations 1.5.6 and 1.5.7
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence from 7 RCTs comparing transcatheter valvotomy with surgical valvotomy (either
by minimally invasive or standard surgery) in people with rheumatic severe mitral stenosis
demonstrated very few differences in outcomes. The committee agreed that surgical
valvotomy is no longer commonly used in practice because similar results can be achieved
with the transcatheter procedure, with less trauma and scarring and at a lower cost to the
NHS. The evidence was limited by small studies, often with only a small number of events,
and most outcomes being graded as very low quality. The committee agreed that
transcatheter valvotomy could be considered for adults with rheumatic severe mitral
stenosis who need an intervention and for whom this procedure would be suitable.

 
No evidence was identified for mitral valve replacement in those with rheumatic mitral
stenosis when transcatheter valvotomy is not suitable. The committee agreed this it was
important to make a recommendation for these people. Although no evidence was
included, the condition would likely deteriorate without an intervention.
It was not appropriate to extrapolate evidence from rheumatic mitral stenosis to calcific
mitral stenosis because they are 2 very different pathologies. Because there was no
evidence included for calcific mitral stenosis, the committee made a recommendation for
research to inform future practice.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations are in line with current practice.
Return to the recommendations
Interventions for mitral regurgitation
Recommendations 1.5.8 to 1.5.14
Why the committee made the recommendations
Repair or replacement when surgery is suitable
Evidence from 3 RCTs demonstrated few differences between surgical repair and surgical
replacement in those with severe mitral regurgitation. (One study included both primary
and secondary mitral regurgitation; the other 2 studies covered secondary mitral
regurgitation only). The largest effect was for the need for reintervention for secondary
mitral regurgitation, with fewer repeat interventions needed in the replacement group.
Overall, the included evidence was limited; all studies were very small, with very few
events reported for most outcomes and substantial uncertainty in the effects reported.
Most outcomes were graded as very low quality. The lack of stronger evidence is likely to
be because surgical repair has been preferred to replacement in mitral valve surgery for
the past few decades. This was based on observational evidence and because
randomising to repair or replacement in people for whom repair is suitable was thought to
be unethical. Based on these limitations, the committee made recommendations reflecting
current practice for those with severe mitral regurgitation requiring an intervention, with

 
surgical repair recommended in those for whom it is suitable and replacement when repair
is not suitable.
The committee noted that there are differences in the aetiology and treatment of primary
and secondary mitral regurgitation. Although valve intervention is the next step for primary
mitral regurgitation and an indication for intervention, for secondary mitral regurgitation
the underlying heart failure is usually treated first. Therefore, the committee recommended
that an intervention should be offered for severe primary mitral regurgitation and
considered for secondary mitral regurgitation after optimisation of medical management.
Invasiveness of surgery
Evidence from 5 RCTs comparing minimally invasive surgery with median sternotomy for
mitral regurgitation or mixed/unclear mitral valve disease demonstrated few differences.
The studies were limited by small participant numbers and a small number of events for
many reported outcomes. There was substantial uncertainty for most reported outcomes,
a lack of long-term data for many outcomes, and most outcomes were graded as low or
very low quality. Overall, when any larger differences were observed (for example, length
of stay), these were for a benefit of minimally invasive procedures. A single health
economic study suggested the cost of minimally invasive surgery was less per person than
median sternotomy. However, the committee did not consider the included evidence to be
strong enough to support recommending 1 type of surgery over the other. They agreed
that median sternotomy and minimally invasive surgery should be options for those with
mitral regurgitation requiring mitral valve surgery, with the decision being based on patient
characteristics and patient preferences. A lack of expertise in minimally invasive surgery
locally should not be used as a reason for not performing a minimally invasive procedure
and patients should be referred to a centre where there is expertise if this procedure is
agreed as most suitable.
Transcatheter mitral valve repair in primary mitral regurgitation when surgery
is unsuitable
No clinical evidence was identified comparing transcatheter mitral valve repair with
medical management for primary mitral regurgitation when surgery is not suitable. The
committee noted that the lack of evidence may be because it is well established that
medical management does not improve outcomes and transcatheter mitral valve repair is
useful when surgery cannot be performed. One health economic study, based on a
non-randomised registry, reported that transcatheter repair was cost effective compared

 
with medical management in those with severe mitral regurgitation when surgery was not
suitable. This study had limitations because it included people with secondary mitral
regurgitation and used data from a prospective, single-arm registry with a control group
obtained retrospectively. A second Japanese study on a mixed population with secondary
and primary mitral regurgitation found transcatheter repair with the MitraClip device to be
cost effective. This study had some limitations too as the relative treatment effects were
informed from a propensity score matching study rather than an RCT.
A health economic model developed as part of this guideline did not find MitraClip to be
cost effective for adults with secondary mitral regurgitation. However, the committee
agreed that it was plausible that MitraClip would offer more benefits for people with
primary mitral regurgitation because they are likely to have less residual disease affecting
quality of life after the intervention. The committee agreed to recommend that
transcatheter mitral valve repair should be considered for primary severe mitral
regurgitation with symptoms when surgery is unsuitable.
Transcatheter mitral valve repair in secondary mitral regurgitation when
surgery is unsuitable
Evidence was included from 3 RCTs comparing transcatheter mitral valve repair with
medical management for secondary mitral regurgitation. Two of these were clearly in a
population in which surgery was not suitable and covered the use of the MitraClip device;
the third study covered a Carillon device rather than MitraClip and the population was
unclear. Outcomes from all 3 studies were pooled if possible, in the clinical review, but the
health economic modelling was limited to the population in which surgery was not suitable.
The clinical review highlighted uncertainty in the results for 3 outcomes (all-cause
mortality, cardiac mortality and onset/exacerbation of heart failure at 1 to 3 years or 2 to
3 years). Some studies demonstrated a benefit of transcatheter repair, some a harm (lack
of benefit) and some no difference. One UK health economic study based on the results of
the COAPT trial, which enrolled people with very severe secondary mitral regurgitation
deemed inoperable, found that transcatheter edge-to-edge repair with MitraClip device
had an incremental cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) of about £30,000.
A health economic model was developed as part of the guideline to investigate the cost
effectiveness of using the MitraClip device when surgery is not suitable. The model
demonstrated that transcatheter mitral valve repair had a low chance of being cost
effective at £20,000 per QALY gained, with an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of

 
£30,000 per QALY gained. These results are in line with the UK study identified in the
literature review. The health economic model was largely based on results from the COAPT
trial, which covered transcatheter mitral valve repair in severe secondary mitral
regurgitation. This trial demonstrated substantial benefits over medical management alone
when surgery was unsuitable. However, it was not considered to be cost effective at the
current list price. For this reason, edge-to-edge mitral valve repair was not recommended
over medical management.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Repair or replacement when surgery is suitable
Edge-to-edge repair is not widely available in the NHS. Therefore, this recommendation
may lead to a change in practice and increase the amount of percutaneous mitral
intervention in those for whom it is suitable.
Invasiveness of surgery
The recommendations are in line with current practice.
Transcatheter mitral valve repair in primary mitral regurgitation when surgery
is unsuitable
Transcatheter mitral valve repair is rarely done for primary mitral regurgitation when an
intervention is needed and surgery is unsuitable, so the recommendation may lead to a
change in practice. This procedure has only recently been commissioned by the NHS and
its use is likely to increase now based on this commissioning. The recommendation is
unlikely to increase use much beyond this.
Transcatheter mitral valve repair in secondary mitral regurgitation when
surgery is unsuitable
Transcatheter mitral valve repair is not currently used for secondary mitral regurgitation
because it has not been commissioned by the NHS for this. The recommendation is
unlikely to lead to a change in practice.
Return to recommendations

 
Interventions for tricuspid regurgitation
Recommendations 1.5.15 and 1.5.16
Why the committee made these recommendations
A single RCT was identified comparing transcatheter repair plus optimal medical
management with optimal medical management alone in people with severe, symptomatic
tricuspid regurgitation and a high surgical risk score. Patients with associated tricuspid
regurgitation have worse prognosis after mitral valve intervention than those with mild or
no tricuspid regurgitation. There is strong evidence that secondary functional tricuspid
regurgitation that is severe does not improve after fixing the mitral lesion. Moderate
tricuspid regurgitation does remain stable in a few patients after mitral correction.
However, in a significant number, it does not improve and may get worse. Tricuspid
annuloplasty by an experienced surgeon (at the time of mitral surgery) is a quick
procedure that reduces the amount of tricuspid regurgitation and may improve prognosis.
Patients with associated tricuspid regurgitation have a worse prognosis after aortic valve
intervention than those with mild or no tricuspid regurgitation. There is strong evidence
(but not reviewed here) that secondary functional tricuspid regurgitation that is severe
does not improve after fixing the left-sided lesion. Tricuspid annuloplasty by an
experienced surgeon is a quick procedure that does reduce the amount of tricuspid
regurgitation and may improve prognosis of these patients.
The committee made a recommendation for research to inform future guidance.
How the recommendations might affect practice
These recommendations are in line with current practice.
Return to recommendations
Repeat intervention
Recommendation 1.6.1

 
Why the committee made the recommendation
No evidence was identified comparing surgery with medical management for people with
failing biological prosthetic aortic valves. However, the committee agreed that surgery
should be considered in this group because their condition may deteriorate if left without
intervention on medical management.
Similarly, no evidence was identified comparing transcatheter repeat intervention with
medical management when surgery is unsuitable for people with failing biological
prosthetic aortic valves. However, the committee agreed that repeat transcatheter
intervention should be considered in this group because their condition may deteriorate if
left without intervention on medical management.
For people who can have surgery, there were no RCTs comparing transcatheter
intervention with surgery for repeat intervention and the only included studies were
non-randomised. The committee were not able to base recommendations on this because
of the limitations with non-randomised evidence. Therefore, they recommended that a
shared decision should be based on short- and longer-term benefits, the type of valve
dysfunction and prosthesis, the risks associated with the procedure and the possible need
for other cardiac procedures. The term 'degenerated' refers to progressive degeneration
and does not include failure of the valve due to endocarditis or thrombosis. The
recommendation was limited to those with symptoms because this was considered to be
an indication for repeat intervention.
The committee also made recommendations for research for repeat intervention for failing
biological prosthetic aortic, mitral and tricuspid valves because the only available evidence
was non-randomised.
How the recommendation might affect practice
When both transcatheter and surgical procedures are options for repeat intervention, the
choice of procedure is usually based on individual patient characteristics although surgery
may be done more often. When surgery is not an option, transcatheter intervention is used
as the only alternative to medical management. The recommendation will therefore not
represent a change in practice.
Return to recommendation

 
Anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy
Recommendations 1.7.1 to 1.7.3
Why the committee made the recommendations
Anticoagulant and antiplatelet treatment after surgical biological valve
replacement
Evidence from a population without atrial fibrillation demonstrated an increased risk of
major bleeding with vitamin K antagonist compared with single antiplatelet therapy
(aspirin). No clear reduction in mortality or thromboembolic events was observed with
vitamin K antagonist. Therefore, the committee agreed that anticoagulation should not be
offered after surgical biological valve replacement unless there are other indications for
anticoagulation. This covers both vitamin K antagonists and direct-acting oral
anticoagulants (DOACs) because there was no evidence to show that DOACs are safe. One
small study in people with atrial fibrillation suggested there may be no clear differences in
outcomes between DOACs and vitamin K antagonists, and it is not common practice to use
DOACs for this group. The committee agreed that if there is already an indication for
anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy, for example, because of atrial fibrillation, the
existing NICE guidelines for these indications should be followed.
Despite 1 study demonstrating a potential reduction in arterial thromboembolic events and
vascular mortality with combined anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy compared with
anticoagulant therapy alone after surgical biological valve replacement, there was
uncertainty around this result. This uncertainty, combined with further study limitations,
including issues with the target international normalised ratio used and the selective
population, meant that the study could not be used to inform general recommendations for
surgical biological valve replacement.
There was a lack of evidence comparing anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy with no
treatment after surgical biological valve replacement, so the committee made a
recommendation for research. They made another recommendation for research to
investigate the long-term effect of anticoagulant or antithrombotic therapy on valve
function and outcomes after biological valve replacement because no long-term data was
available.

 
Single antiplatelet therapy after TAVI
Evidence from 4 studies demonstrated a clinically important benefit of single antiplatelet
therapy (aspirin) compared with dual antiplatelet therapy in reducing major and minor
bleeding in the short-to-medium term. Based on this, the committee agreed that single
rather than dual antiplatelet therapy should be considered after TAVI. As aspirin is used in
practice, and this was used in all of the studies, aspirin was recommended, with
clopidogrel specified as the alternative if aspirin was not tolerated.
The committee were also aware of observational evidence that antiplatelets reduced the
risk of valve thrombosis and improved valve durability over the long term. There was also
evidence from 1 study demonstrating harms of DOACs compared with single antiplatelet
therapy for most reported outcomes, including mortality, bleeding and withdrawal because
of adverse events. This further supported the recommendation for single antiplatelet
therapy. Because of the lack of evidence comparing anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy
with no treatment after TAVI, the committee made a recommendation for research.
Valve repair
No evidence was identified comparing different anticoagulant and antiplatelet treatments
in adults who have had valve repair. The committee made a recommendation for research
comparing anticoagulant and antiplatelet treatments with placebo after valve repair.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Anticoagulant and antiplatelet treatment after surgical biological valve
replacement
Practice is currently variable, with some centres offering vitamin K antagonists after
surgical biological valve replacement. Therefore, the recommendation will lead to a change
in practice in some centres.
Single antiplatelet therapy after TAVI
It is unusual for people not to receive at least single antiplatelet therapy after TAVI and
many people receive dual antiplatelet therapy. The recommendation was not thought to
represent a change in practice in terms of the number of people who receive some form of
antiplatelet therapy after a transcatheter procedure.

 
Return to recommendations
Monitoring after an intervention
Recommendation 1.8.1
Why the committee made the recommendation
No evidence was found for the frequency of monitoring after an intervention for valve
disease. Current practice is variable and depends on patient factors, such as
comorbidities, other cardiac disease or previous heart surgery, as well as the type of
procedure performed (repair or replacement). Follow up also depends on the type of valve
used for a replacement. The committee agreed that mechanical valves have good
durability with a low risk of failure. In contrast, biological valves have lower durability with
deterioration possible within 10 years. The committee noted that, although practice varies,
mechanical valves may be monitored over the first 12 months and then only checked if
problems develop. Monitoring is usually more frequent for biological valves – with some
centres offering annual follow up starting from the year of the operation and others
starting annual follow up after 5 years. Any concerns about abnormal valve function may
also affect the frequency of monitoring, with more frequent follow up if there are concerns.
The committee agreed that frequency of follow up should be discussed with the patient.
Some people find more frequent monitoring reassuring whereas for others this leads to
increased anxiety. People should be encouraged to seek advice if they feel that their
condition has deteriorated. There is a higher risk of endocarditis in replacement valves and
people should be encouraged to report symptoms.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice, which is variable and depends on various
factors, such as valve durability and patient comorbidities and preferences.
Return to recommendation
Information and advice
Recommendations 1.9.1 to 1.9.5

 
Why the committee made the recommendations
Clear and consistent evidence outlined the negative impact of symptoms of valve disease
and loss of control that led to feelings of despair and insecurity. In this context, a single
point of contact for some people may increase the hope and security afforded between
appointments.
The committee also agreed that it was useful to list areas of information and advice that
are important to people with valve disease to ensure that their expectations accurately
match the likely course of their condition. Having this information will be beneficial for
planning, reducing anxiety and supporting shared decision making. This may include
relevant information for patients and carers (when appropriate) about the possibility of
delirium after valve surgery, in line with the NICE guideline on delirium.
From the evidence and their experience, the committee noted the psychological impact of
valve disease on a person, whether or not the person currently has symptoms. They
agreed that clinicians should be aware of the potential psychological impact of receiving a
diagnosis of heart valve disease and consider providing additional advice and support.
The committee stressed the importance of individualised care and shared decision making
and referenced the relevant NICE guidelines. Specific advice and support at the point of
transition from paediatric to adult services was also agreed to be important to ensure
young adults are given appropriate information on the likely progression of their valve
disease and referrals to adult valve clinics.
The committee noted the limitations of the available evidence, which was mostly from
those being considered for TAVI. These people typically have more complex comorbidities,
and their older age means that their hopes and fears are different from those of younger
adults. Therefore, the committee made a recommendation for research on the information
and advice needs of all adult age groups with valve disease of all severities and stages.
Studies should include patient-reported outcomes and experiences of decision aids.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Currently not all adults with valve disease have a point of contact between appointments
or psychological support, and so these recommendations will need a change by some
providers.

 
Return to recommendations

 
Context
The heart has 4 valves (aortic, mitral, tricuspid and pulmonary) that control blood flow.
In heart valve disease, valve function can be impaired by:
• stenosis, a narrowing or stiffening of the valve, which restricts its opening and
obstructs the forward flow of blood
• regurgitation, failure of the valve to close completely, which allows blood to flow
backward.
There can be stenosis and regurgitation of the same valve (mixed valve disease) or
disease may affect more than one valve (multiple valve disease).
Mitral and tricuspid heart valve disease can be primary or secondary. Primary disease
affects the valve structure, whereas secondary disease results from enlargement or
dysfunction of the heart chambers (atria or ventricles) with otherwise normal mitral or
tricuspid valve structure.
Heart valve disease can be congenital or acquired. Acquired valve degeneration is
currently the main cause of heart valve disease, leading to the most common types of
heart valve disease, as for example calcific aortic stenosis and myxomatous or calcific
degeneration of the mitral valve.
Secondary heart valve disease can be classified as:
• ventricular-secondary mitral or tricuspid regurgitation
• atrial-secondary mitral or tricuspid regurgitation.
Among people aged 65 years or over the prevalence of asymptomatic heart valve disease
may be more than 50%, whereas the prevalence of clinically significant heart valve disease
is around 11%. It is predicted that for people over 65, the prevalence of heart valve disease
will increase, from 1.5 million people currently to more than 3 million in 2046.
People with heart valve disease may have no symptoms or may have symptoms that can
depend on the affected valve. Associated heart rhythm problems, such as atrial fibrillation

 
or heart block, may cause palpitations and breathlessness, or dizziness and
light-headedness, respectively. Untreated severe disease can lead to valvular heart failure,
with symptoms including breathlessness, reduced exercise capacity, tiredness and swollen
ankles. Heart valves stiffen as part of the ageing process, making dysfunction more likely
in older people. We hope that this guideline will raise awareness of heart valve disease and
improve diagnosis and management.