Heart failure algorithms for remote monitoring in people with cardiac implantable
electronic devices
1 Recommendations
Use as an option
For people with heart failure
1.1 Use HeartLogic and TriageHF as options for algorithm-based remote monitoring
in people with cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) who have heart
failure. They should be used as part of a specialist multidisciplinary heart failure
service with alerts reviewed and acted on by specialist healthcare professionals.
Can only be used in research
For people with heart failure
1.2 More research is needed on HeartInsight for algorithm-based remote monitoring
in people with CIEDs who have heart failure, before it can be routinely used in the
NHS.
For people at risk of developing heart failure
1.3 More research is needed on HeartInsight, HeartLogic and TriageHF for algorithm-
based remote monitoring in people with CIEDs who are at risk of developing heart
failure, before they can be routinely used in the NHS.

 
More research
1.4 More research for the technologies in sections 1.2 and 1.3 is needed in the
populations outlined. This research is needed on:
• prognostic accuracy
• rates of false positives or unexplained alerts
• hospitalisation rates
• heart-failure-related mortality rates
• rates of emergency department or primary care visits
• patient-reported outcomes.
1.5 Access to the technologies in sections 1.2 and 1.3 in the populations outlined
should be through company, research or non-core NHS funding, and clinical or
financial risks should be appropriately managed.
Do not use
1.6 CorVue should not be used for algorithm-based remote monitoring in people with
CIEDs who have or are at risk of developing heart failure.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Algorithm-based remote monitoring automatically detects the early signs of worsening
heart failure and sends an alert to the healthcare professional. People who have or are at
risk of developing heart failure can be offered CIEDs as part of heart failure therapy.
Algorithm-based remote monitoring may be activated in a person's CIED.
Evidence for HeartLogic and TriageHF shows that they can detect the signs of worsening
heart failure that could lead to hospitalisation or an unscheduled clinic visit (referred to as
heart failure events). Evidence shows that CIEDs used with HeartLogic or TriageHF reduce
hospitalisations compared with CIEDs used with remote monitoring only. Collection of

 
registry data is recommended for these algorithms to confirm the extent of the benefit
seen in the studies.
It is uncertain whether the HeartInsight algorithm can detect early signs of worsening
heart failure. There is also no evidence to show how well CIEDs that use HeartInsight
reduce heart failure events. HeartInsight may be better at predicting worsening heart
failure and reducing hospitalisations than CIEDs without algorithms, so more research is
recommended.
More research is also recommended for HeartInsight, HeartLogic and TriageHF in people
at risk of developing heart failure because there is very limited evidence in this population.
CorVue collects only intrathoracic impedance data, while the other algorithms monitor
additional factors. Clinical trial evidence suggests that CorVue fails to detect some signs
of worsening heart failure and has a high rate of false-positive alerts (alerts that are not
followed by a heart failure event). So CorVue is not recommended for use in the NHS.

 
2 Heart failure algorithms
Clinical need and practice
2.1 Heart failure is a clinical syndrome caused by any structural or functional cardiac
disorder that impairs the heart's ability to efficiently pump blood around the
body. The most common symptoms of heart failure are breathlessness, fatigue
and oedema. Conditions that can cause heart failure include:
• coronary heart disease
• high blood pressure
• heart rhythm or valve abnormalities and
• conditions affecting the heart muscle (cardiomyopathies and myocarditis).
Around 920,000 people in the UK were living with heart failure in 2018 with
an estimated 200,000 new diagnoses each year. Heart failure mainly affects
people over 65, with an average age at diagnosis of 77.
2.2 Cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) are recommended as treatment
options for some people who have or are at high risk of heart failure. The
different types of CIEDs are pacemakers, implantable cardioverter defibrillators,
and cardiac resynchronisation therapy devices.
2.3 Remote monitoring is the ability for a CIED to communicate wirelessly with a
remote monitoring system. People who have CIEDs must be followed up by
hospitals for regular technical reviews of how their device is working. They may
also have scheduled appointments, during which the clinical events recorded by
the device are monitored. There is a lot of variation in clinical practice and the
frequency of these follow-up visits varies according to the person's condition.
NICE's guideline on diagnosis and management of chronic heart failure in adults
recommends that reviews are offered every 6 months for people whose condition
is stable, but clinical experts highlighted that in practice most people would have
a review annually. Sometimes clinical reviews are only triggered if the person with

 
the CIED reports worsening symptoms.
2.4 Some CIEDs have algorithm-based remote monitoring incorporated in the device.
Heart failure algorithms analyse and collate different clinical data recorded by the
device to detect gradual worsening of heart failure. The system can send alerts
to healthcare professionals to prompt a review of the stored data. This enables
proactive investigation into the cause of the suspected decompensation,
potentially before the person even feels symptomatic. This could ensure that
people have appropriate treatment as early as possible, reducing the number of
unnecessary hospital visits.
The interventions
There are 4 heart failure algorithms that were identified as relevant for inclusion in this
assessment. Each algorithm is only compatible with specific CIEDs manufactured by the
same company that makes the algorithm.
CorVue (Abbott Medical)
2.5 The CorVue algorithm works with the Merlin.net Patient Care Network (PCN)
platform, and is intended for remotely monitoring for the early signs of heart
failure in people who have compatible CIEDs. The CorVue algorithm collects
intrathoracic impedance data from the CIED and transmits it to the Merlin.net
PCN platform via the mobile app (myMerlinPulse). It does this using Bluetooth
and an internet or mobile network connection to generate an alert. Or, instead of
using the app-based smartphone transmitter, the company can provide a remote
monitoring unit (Merlin@Home) that connects via Wi-Fi, mobile or landline
connection. Healthcare professionals can view the data transmitted by the device
on the Merlin.net PCN platform. Access to Merlin.net and the mobile transmitter
is provided as part of the CIED, and the CorVue algorithm comes free of charge
with the CIED devices.
2.6 The CorVue algorithm automatically calculates the mean daily impedance (from
12 daily measurements). It also collects reference impedance data based on the
previous 12 to 14 days, which changes continuously based on new impedance
readings. If a consistent drop of daily impedance values is detected (13 or

 
14 consecutive days in congestion) then a congestive event is reported and
detected during device check-up. Patient alerts can be activated via remote
monitoring if the person wishes.
HeartInsight (Biotronik)
2.7 HeartInsight is a predictive algorithm designed to monitor for early signs of
worsening heart failure in people with compatible CIEDs. The algorithm works
with the BIOTRONIK Home Monitoring system. The HeartInsight algorithm
combines the following 7 parameters into 1 composite score (calculated daily):
• atrial burden
• heart rate variability
• general activity
• thoracic impedance
• heart rate
• heart rate at rest and
• premature ventricular contractions.
2.8 HeartInsight triggers an alert to healthcare professionals (via text message, email
or both) once the prespecified threshold is exceeded for 3 consecutive
transmissions (normally 3 consecutive days), indicating higher risk of worsening
heart failure. The threshold is customisable. Upon receipt of an alert, a healthcare
professional logs on to the Home Monitoring Service Centre website to review
and assess the alert.
2.9 The system includes the handheld CardioMessenger device, which transmits
data automatically and daily from the CIED to the BIOTRONIK Home Monitoring
system via a mobile phone network. Access to HeartInsight has a one-off cost of
£450 per person. Standard Home Monitoring is a separate cost.

 
HeartLogic (Boston Scientific)
2.10 HeartLogic is a diagnostic algorithm designed to monitor for early signs of
worsening heart failure in people with compatible CIEDs. It works with the
Latitude NXT Patient Management System. Measurements including heart
sounds, thoracic impedance, respiration, heart rate and activity are collected by
the implanted device. The HeartLogic algorithm then combines these into
1 composite index that indicates decompensation. Boston Scientific's HeartLogic
and Latitude NXT Patient Management System work together to provide
advanced monitoring and management capabilities for people with heart failure
who have CIEDs. The system has daily data transfers to the clinical team. The
transmitter can use a mobile phone connection or an internet connection to relay
the data. The system is configured to send an alert to a healthcare professional
when the index is over a set threshold (customisable by a healthcare
professional). Healthcare professionals need to log on to the LATITUDE NXT
website to receive alerts. Secondary notification of alerts may be through email
or text message. Access to HeartLogic has a one-off cost of £3,650 per person,
but discounts may be offered based on purchase volume.
TriageHF (Medtronic)
2.11 TriageHF is an alert-based algorithm used with CareLink remote monitoring. It is a
monitoring system for identifying and managing an increased risk of heart failure
or worsening heart failure in people with CIEDs. When TriageHF is used within a
structured heart failure clinical care pathway it is called TriageHF Plus. TriageHF
is hosted on the Medtronic CareLink network for collaborative management of
heart failure between clinical teams. The algorithm monitors the following
parameters:
• atrial tachycardia
• atrial fibrillation burden
• ventricular rate during atrial tachycardia or atrial fibrillation
• OptiVol fluid index (which tracks changes in thoracic impedance over time)
• general activity

 
• night ventricular rate
• heart rate variability
• percent of ventricular pacing
• treated ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation and
• defibrillator shocks.
CareLink uses a plug-in monitor or a smartphone app for transmitting data.
Using a mobile or landline connection, data is transmitted from the CIED to
the CareLink network where it can be accessed by healthcare professionals.
Data can be transmitted:
• manually, if a person notices symptoms
• automatically, based on TriageHF algorithm alert triggers, or
• by scheduled transmission, based on a predefined date to replace a routine
check.
For each day the data is transmitted, the TriageHF algorithm generates a
daily risk status of a heart failure event occurring in the next 30 days (low,
medium or high risk). This is based on the maximum daily risk status for the
previous 30 days. A heart failure management report is generated on the
daily risk status. The CareLink network sends an alert for people who have
high-risk score so that they can be contacted for a telephone consultation.
Access to TriageHF and CareLink remote monitoring has a yearly cost of
£100 per person.
The comparator
Conventional remote monitoring of heart failure in people with
CIEDs
2.12 Standard care for monitoring heart failure in people who have CIEDs is periodic

 
reviews of device function with a cardiac physiologist or cardiologist. A person
will also have ad hoc reviews of symptoms with a GP, specialist nurse,
cardiologist or a heart failure team. The number and timing of the reviews varies
in practice depending on the person's symptoms (see section 2.3). The
organisation of heart failure monitoring pathways varies in practice between
different trusts, and even between different hospitals.

 
3 Committee discussion
The diagnostics advisory committee looked at evidence on algorithm-based remote
monitoring of heart failure in people with cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs).
Evidence was considered from several sources, including an external assessment report
and an overview of that report. Full details are in the project documents for this guidance.
Patient considerations
3.1 Wider availability of algorithm-based remote monitoring may allow greater access
to care for people who are less able to attend in-person appointments (because
of costs associated with travel, poor public transport, time taken from work,
physical impairments, or anxiety). An alert may be followed by an initial telephone
call to determine whether in-person follow up is needed. This could reduce the
number of unnecessary in-person clinic visits.
3.2 The patient expert explained that CIEDs provide a sense of security to people
because they know that their condition is being managed. With conventional
remote monitoring, an unscheduled review would only be triggered if the person
reports worsening symptoms. Algorithm-based remote monitoring provides
reassurance to people because they know that alerts are transmitted
automatically and reviewed by a healthcare professional, potentially before they
experience symptoms. This could prevent people being admitted to hospital and
improve their quality of life. But the committee acknowledged that, for some
people, false-positive alerts (when an alert is triggered but there are no signs of
decompensation) may cause unnecessary anxiety. The committee recommended
more research on people's experiences with having heart failure algorithms
activated on their CIEDs.

 
Clinical effectiveness
Prognostic accuracy
3.3 The committee noted that the heart failure algorithms needed to be considered
independently of each other because they are each unique and have different
alert rates and levels of accuracy. Each of the heart failure algorithms collects
different data types to monitor decompensation or predict a person's risk status.
The committee noted that CorVue collects only intrathoracic impedance data,
while the other algorithms monitor additional factors (see sections 2.5 to 2.11).
The committee noted that the prognostic accuracy of CorVue may be affected by
the collection of only 1 data type.
3.4 For the heart failure event endpoint defined by the Framingham Heart Study,
CorVue had a sensitivity of 68%. For endpoints related to hospitalisation, clinic
visits and changes to treatment, sensitivity ranged from 20% to 61.9%. This
suggests that people who are experiencing decompensation may not have an
alert triggered using CorVue. Clinical experts noted that heart failure algorithms
should have a high sensitivity. This is to ensure that people with early signs of a
heart failure event can be identified, assessed and have treatment if necessary,
and so people are not missed. False positives were also considered to be high in
all studies reporting this outcome. All studies were also assessed by the external
assessment group (EAG) as being at a high risk of bias, with a key concern being
the analysis methods. The committee concluded that CorVue cannot accurately
predict heart failure events.
3.5 Evidence from a single published study suggested that, at the nominal threshold
of 4.5, HeartInsight had 65.5% sensitivity and 86.7% specificity for the endpoint
of first post-implant heart failure hospitalisation. For the endpoint of heart failure
hospitalisation, outpatient intravenous intervention or death, HeartInsight had
54.8% sensitivity and 86.5% specificity. The positive predictive value was
reported as 7.7%, indicating that there is a high probability that an alert is a false
positive. This study was also assessed by the EAG as being at a high risk of bias,
with a key concern being the analysis methods. The committee concluded that it
is uncertain whether HeartInsight can accurately predict heart failure events.
3.6 Using the study endpoint of worsening heart failure, HeartLogic showed

 
sensitivity ranging from 70% to 100%, and specificity ranging from 61% to 93%.
False positives and unexplained alert rates were generally low in 6 studies.
Statistically significant associations were observed between being in alert and
hospitalisations, length of hospital stay, rate of heart failure events and rate of
emergency care visits. All studies reporting prognostic accuracy data for
HeartLogic were assessed by the EAG as being at a high risk of bias with the
analysis methods being a key concern. The committee also considered data from
a study that was published after the EAG's review was complete. Singh et al.
(2024) evaluated HeartLogic in 1,458 people. For the endpoint of detecting heart
failure events, HeartLogic demonstrated sensitivity of 74.5% and false-positive
rate of 1.48 alerts per patient-year. The committee concluded that while there are
some concerns regarding the quality of the prognostic accuracy data, it is likely
that HeartLogic can predict heart failure events.
3.7 Using the study endpoint of worsening heart failure in people with a 'high-risk'
status, TriageHF demonstrated sensitivity ranging from 87.9% to 98.6% and
specificity ranging from 59.4% to 63.4%. The false-positive rate was reported in
1 study and was considered to be low. Most studies reporting prognostic
accuracy data were assessed by the EAG as being at a high or unclear risk of
bias. A key concern was the analysis methods, and some of the studies were only
available as abstracts that contained limited information. The committee
concluded that while there are some concerns regarding the quality of the
prognostic accuracy data, it is likely that TriageHF can predict heart failure
events.
False-positive or unexplained alerts
3.8 The committee noted that heart failure algorithms are intended to be used to
support review of heart failure data by healthcare professionals, and should not
be used in isolation to make treatment decisions. This is because events other
than heart failure decompensation can sometimes trigger an alert. For example,
viral respiratory illnesses can increase a person's intrathoracic impedance, which
could cause an alert to be triggered even if the person has no decompensation.
In a study this would be classed as a false-positive alert. The committee noted
that these alerts and the follow up with a person would still be valuable because
a non-heart-failure clinical event may still require intervention.

 
3.9 Some studies reported high rates of false-positive alerts. But the committee
noted that all alerts would be reviewed alongside other clinical information and
discussed with the person before a treatment decision is made. So the
committee considered that unnecessary treatment arising from false-positive
alerts is unlikely and so harms from over treatment when using heart failure
algorithms are expected to be low.
3.10 The committee discussed the impact that the number of false positives could
have on service burden. Specialist committee members indicated that this burden
is low in their experience, because initial interaction following an alert is usually
via phone call rather than in-person. The committee concluded that more
research should be done on the rate of false-positive alerts.
Intermediate and clinical outcomes
CorVue
3.11 Shapiro et al. (2017) showed a statistically significant reduction in hospitalisations
for people using the CorVue algorithm. But, this study was assessed by the EAG
as being at a substantial risk of confounding because the comparator was people
with no implanted device having home care. So the reduction in hospitalisations
reported in the study could be because of the CIED rather than the CorVue
algorithm. The committee concluded that it is uncertain whether use of CorVue
can reduce hospitalisations.
HeartInsight
3.12 No evidence was identified that compared the HeartInsight algorithm with no
algorithm use.
HeartLogic
3.13 Evidence suggests that using the HeartLogic algorithm instead of conventional
remote monitoring, provides statistically significant reductions in:

 
• hospitalisations
• the rate of heart failure events
• the length of hospital stays and
• emergency or urgent care visits.
The 2 key comparative studies that were used in cost-effectiveness
modelling both had small sample sizes; Treskes et al. (2021) included
68 people and Feijen et al. (2023) included 161 people. This raised concerns
regarding the statistical power of these studies to detect the effects of heart
failure algorithms. These studies were also assessed by the EAG as being at
serious risk of bias. The committee concluded that while there are concerns
regarding the quality of the comparative evidence for HeartLogic, it is likely
that HeartLogic can reduce heart failure events compared with no algorithm
use.
TriageHF
3.14 For TriageHF, comparative evidence was limited to 1 study, Ahmed et al. (2024).
This is a real-world, UK study of 758 people. This study reported a statistically
significant reduction in hospitalisation with TriageHF compared with no algorithm
use. Ahmed et al. was assessed by the EAG as being at a critical risk of bias
because of risks of confounding and selection bias. The committee concluded
that while there are concerns regarding the quality of the comparative evidence
from Ahmed et al., it is likely that TriageHF can reduce heart failure events
compared with no algorithm use.
Failure rates
3.15 CIEDs may fail to transmit data if there are technical problems or connectivity
issues, including internet problems, or if they are out of range of the transmission
device. The committee noted that failure rates in the studies appear to be high,
but it is difficult to separate transmission failure due to technical issues from
transmission failure due to connectivity issues. If data transmission is missed,

 
each algorithm has built-in retry mechanisms that will attempt transmission again.
Healthcare professionals will be notified if a person's data transmission is missed
for a number of weeks. The companies commented that they pay stringent
attention to device failures and always follow up on these. High failure rates
reported in Debski et al. (2020) have been addressed by ensuring that devices
are correctly programmed and that local protocols are in place. The committee
concluded that they have no concerns regarding transmission failure, because
systems are in place to manage and resolve this.
Cost effectiveness
A pairwise analysis approach was used
3.16 A pairwise analysis approach was taken to estimating cost effectiveness. This
was because of the lack of data comparing algorithms and because the
comparator for each algorithm is a brand-specific CIED that is not using the heart
failure algorithm. The EAG explained that the comparator costs differ for each
pairwise analysis because different data sources were used to derive model
inputs. For HeartLogic and TriageHF, evidence on hospitalisation rates was
available, so different rates were used for these 2 interventions and their
comparators. Because of the lack of evidence for CorVue and HeartInsight, no
difference in hospitalisation was assumed between these heart failure algorithms
and their comparators. The hospitalisation rate for these 2 algorithms and their
comparators was assumed to be an average of the rates used for HeartLogic and
TriageHF.
Model structure
3.17 The EAG used comparative hospitalisation data to model the impact of heart
failure algorithms rather than using prognostic accuracy data and a linked
evidence approach. False-positive alerts were indirectly captured in the model for
HeartLogic and TriageHF because study results on the number of unscheduled
visits would be impacted by false-positive alerts. For CorVue and HeartInsight, no
published data was available on unscheduled visits, so it was assumed that there

 
was no difference in the number of unscheduled visits between these heart
failure algorithms and their comparators. This may underestimate the impact that
false-positive alerts have on the cost-effectiveness estimates for CorVue and
HeartInsight.
Probabilistic sensitivity analysis
3.18 The EAG's economic model showed that HeartLogic and TriageHF were more
effective and less costly than standard care. The first probabilistic sensitivity
analysis used probability distributions around mortality and intervention costs.
This analysis showed that the probability of HeartLogic being cost effective was
81% at a threshold of £20,000 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained and
73% at a threshold of £30,000 per QALY gained. The probability of TriageHF
being cost effective was 85% at a threshold of £20,000 per QALY gained and
76% at a threshold of £30,000 per QALY gained. The committee noted that
intervention costs would not be higher than the list price and so uncertainty
around intervention cost should not be included in the probabilistic sensitivity
analysis. The committee acknowledged the importance of considering the
uncertainty around mortality rates, but noted limitations with how this uncertainty
had been modelled. So, an additional probabilistic sensitivity analysis that
excluded uncertainty around intervention costs and mortality was done. This
analysis showed that both HeartLogic and TriageHF have a 100% probability of
being cost effective at thresholds of £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY gained.
Cost-effectiveness estimates are driven by hospitalisation rates
3.19 There was no comparative evidence on hospitalisations for CorVue or
HeartInsight that was considered suitable for inclusion in the EAG's economic
model. A conservative deterministic base-case model assumption was made of
no difference in hospitalisations between CorVue and HeartInsight and their
comparators. The results of this deterministic model showed CorVue and
HeartInsight to be more costly than standard care and equally as effective.
Threshold analysis showed that only a small reduction in hospitalisations would
make these heart failure algorithms cost effective.

 
3.20 The EAG's model used published hospitalisation rates for HeartLogic and
TriageHF. For HeartLogic, the hospitalisation incidence rate ratio of 0.28 was
calculated from Treskes et al. (2021), which indicates a 72% lower rate of
hospitalisations in the intervention group. For TriageHF, the hospitalisation
incidence rate ratio of 0.42 was taken from Ahmed et al. (2024), which indicates
a 58% lower rate of hospitalisations in the intervention group. These inputs
resulted in the technologies being dominant (less costly and more effective than
standard care) in the deterministic model base case. The committee noted that
post hoc or subgroup analyses from these publications show that reductions in
hospitalisations were smaller in some subgroups than in the overall study
populations. For example, an analysis by Ahmed et al. that was limited to data
collected before the onset of the COVID-19 in the UK, gave a hospitalisation
incidence rate ratio of 0.69, indicating a 31% lower rate of hospitalisations in the
intervention group. The committee also recalled the concerns regarding the
quality of the comparative evidence for HeartLogic (see section 3.13) and
TriageHF (see section 3.14) and noted that the risk of confounding may impact
the reliability of the results from these studies. But, only small reductions in
hospitalisations are needed for HeartLogic and TriageHF to be cost effective in
the EAG's model. So the committee concluded that HeartLogic and TriageHF are
likely to be cost-effective uses of NHS resources.
Potential uncaptured benefits
3.21 There was a lack of evidence for the impact of heart failure algorithms on heart-
failure-related mortality rates and health-related quality of life. In the EAG's
deterministic base-case model, conservative assumptions were made that there
is no difference in heart-failure-related mortality rates between heart failure
algorithms and their comparators. The committee noted that if there was an
improvement in mortality or if health-related quality of life is greater when using
heart failure algorithms, then there would be gains in QALYs. These potential
benefits could not be captured in the model because of the lack of evidence.
Modelling of scheduled visits
3.22 The base case modelled 2 scheduled visits per year, in the intervention and

 
comparator arms. In clinical practice, people who have stable heart failure would
likely only have 1 scheduled visit per year. Other people may also only have 1 visit
because of capacity issues. The EAG modelled 2 additional different scenarios for
the intervention arms: no scheduled follow-up visits per year and 1 scheduled
follow-up visit per year. These scenario analyses did not impact the direction of
the model results.
Modelling of unscheduled visits
3.23 In the EAG's base-case model it was assumed that all alerts are reviewed and
followed by an unscheduled, in-person follow-up visit. In practice, alerts may be
followed by an initial remote interaction (such as a phone call) to determine
whether an in-person visit is necessary. Scenarios were modelled in which it was
assumed that 25% and 50% of alerts initially require non-face-to-face follow up.
The committee agreed that the base-case scenario and scenario analyses were
reasonable. Scenarios were also done in which the base-case number of
interactions in the intervention arm was doubled and quadrupled. The committee
agreed that this assumption was reasonable. This was because the overall
number of interactions is likely to be increased in the heart failure algorithm arm
because of healthcare professionals reviewing alerts and following up with
people remotely or in-person. Unscheduled emergency visits to an emergency
department or primary care settings were not modelled. The committee noted
that the number of emergency visits is expected to be lower for people with heart
failure algorithms because alerts are intended to be triggered before the person
experiences symptoms.
More data is needed on people without a diagnosis of heart
failure
3.24 There was very limited evidence in people who have a CIED and do not have a
diagnosis of heart failure but are at high risk of new onset acute heart failure. One
study for TriageHF reported that a proportion of people in the cohort did not have
a prior diagnosis of heart failure. But results were not reported separately for
each population and so could not be used by the EAG to model the population of
people at risk of heart failure. The committee agreed that data is needed on the

 
prognostic accuracy and clinical impact of using heart failure algorithms in this
population.
Collection of registry data
3.25 The committee noted that the evidence available for HeartLogic and TriageHF
suggests that they can accurately detect the signs of worsening heart failure that
could lead to hospitalisation or an unscheduled clinic event. The evidence also
suggests that HeartLogic and TriageHF can reduce the number of heart failure
events compared with conventional remote monitoring. But there are some
concerns about the quality of the evidence for these algorithms and the size of
the effects that could be seen.
3.26 To confirm the extent of the benefit seen in the studies, companies should work
with the NHS to collect registry data for HeartLogic and TriageHF on:
• hospitalisation rates
• heart-failure-related mortality rates
• rates of emergency department or primary care visits
• patient-reported outcomes.
Equalities
Heart failure algorithms could reduce inequalities
3.27 Algorithm-based remote monitoring systems are ideally positioned to reduce
inequalities in access to healthcare. The committee heard that many people,
particularly those from ethnic minority groups and lower socioeconomic
backgrounds, do not seek medical assistance until they need to attend
emergency services. Heart failure algorithms could benefit these people,
because signs of decompensation would be detected and healthcare
professionals automatically alerted, before the person needs to seek emergency

 
assistance. For this reason, people who are unable to advocate for themselves or
who have less awareness of their symptoms would also benefit from heart failure
algorithms. Algorithm-based remote monitoring could also benefit people who
are less mobile or people who live in remote areas. This is because following an
alert, initial follow up may be a phone call to determine if an in-person follow up is
necessary. This will reduce the need for unnecessary travel to hospital
appointments.
Digital inclusion
3.28 Apart from the technologies that can use a landline to send data, access to
technologies for remote monitoring may be restricted in some populations
because of internet requirements. This may mean that older people, people from
lower socioeconomic groups and people in rural areas could be less able to use
algorithm-based remote monitoring because they do not have access to a Wi-Fi
connection. The committee noted that the technology is incorporated into the
person's CIED and does not need the person to engage directly with the
technology themselves.
People may feel confined to their home to ensure their data is
transmitted
3.29 All of the algorithms can transmit data using Wi-Fi, and some using a landline
connection. If people are not in range of a connection, their data will not be
transmitted until they are in range. This may cause anxiety for some people when
leaving their home, because they do not want to risk transmission of an important
alert being missed or delayed.
Ensuring equitable access to heart failure algorithms
3.30 The committee discussed that for heart failure algorithms to be used effectively
in clinical practice, they should be used as part of a multidisciplinary specialist
heart failure service and specialist staff should be available to review and action
alerts. Protocols should also be in place to ensure heart failure is properly

 
managed and alerts are responded to in a timely manner. At present, the way
centres manage heart failure and respond to alerts can vary. This could mean
that some centres are unable to implement heart failure algorithms into their
services, which could lead to inequity of access across the country. Specialist
committee members indicated that directives and initiatives are in place to steer
heart failure services in the right direction for providing equitable access.
Protocols should detail how heart failure alerts fit within the clinical pathway and
how they should be responded to.

 
4 Implementation
NICE intends to develop tools, in association with relevant stakeholders, to help
organisations put this guidance into practice.
In addition NICE will support this guidance through a range of activities to promote the
recommendations for further research. NICE will also incorporate the recommendations for
research in sections 1.2 to 1.4 into its guidance research recommendations database and
highlight these recommendations to public research bodies.