High-sensitivity troponin tests for the early rule out of NSTEMI
1 Recommendations
1.1 The following high-sensitivity troponin tests are recommended as options for the
early rule out of non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) in
people presenting to an emergency department with chest pain and suspected
acute coronary syndrome:
• Access High-Sensitivity Troponin I Assay
• ADVIA Centaur High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin-I Assay
• Alinity High Sensitive Troponin-I assay
• ARCHITECT STAT High Sensitive Troponin-I assay
• Atellica IM High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
• Dimension Vista High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
• Dimension EXL High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
• Elecsys Troponin T-high sensitive assay
• Elecsys Troponin T-high sensitive STAT assay
• VIDAS High sensitive Troponin I assay
• VITROS High Sensitivity Troponin I Assay.
1.2 The tests are recommended for use with different early rule-out test strategies
alongside clinical judgement, including:
• A single sample on presentation using a threshold at or near the limit of
detection, which will vary depending on the assay being used. If this sample
is positive it should not be used to rule in NSTEMI.
• Multiple sample strategies, which typically include a sample at initial

 
assessment followed by a second sample taken at 30 minutes to 3 hours (if
clinically appropriate) and use of 99th percentile thresholds or thresholds at
or near the limit of detection of the assay.
Healthcare professionals should consider the likely time since the onset of
symptoms when interpreting test results.
1.3 When NSTEMI is not ruled out using early rule-out test strategies, use NICE's
guideline on recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin to help diagnose
myocardial infarction, and consider using sex-specific thresholds at the 99th
percentile (see section 4.7 and section 5.2).
1.4 Further research is recommended on the diagnostic performance of the
TriageTrue High Sensitivity Troponin I test when using samples at point of care
(see section 5.1).
Why the committee made these recommendations
When someone comes to a hospital emergency department with chest pain, tests are
needed to work out if they're having a myocardial infarction (heart attack), and if so, what
type it is and what treatment they need. Standard troponin tests take 10 to 12 hours, so
people need to be admitted to hospital while they wait for the results.
High-sensitivity troponin tests can help to quickly rule out a type of heart attack called an
NSTEMI. Doing these tests can mean people with normal troponin levels do not need to be
admitted to hospital, and those with a confirmed NSTEMI can get earlier treatment.
Evidence shows that, of the high-sensitivity troponin tests, 9 are similarly effective in
terms of diagnostic performance. Of these, 8 are also similarly cost effective compared
with standard troponin tests in different early rule-out test strategies and so are
recommended for use in the NHS.
There is only 1 diagnostic accuracy study for Elecsys STAT, and no diagnostic accuracy
evidence for Alinity and Dimension EXL. But they use the same methods, principles and
reagents as alternative versions of the tests that do have diagnostic accuracy evidence
and were included in the economic model. The main difference is that they are run on
different analysers. They are therefore also recommended.

 
Although the TriageTrue test has the potential to be cost effective, its diagnostic accuracy
when used on whole blood is uncertain.

 
2 The diagnostic tests
Clinical need and practice
2.1 Chest pain and suspected myocardial infarction were the cause of about 5% of all
emergency hospital admissions in 2017 to 2018. However, myocardial infarction
will have occurred in only about 20% of those admissions. Tests that can quickly
tell whether a person is having a myocardial infarction or not could mean that
unnecessary hospital admissions are avoided, reducing waiting time and anxiety
for many people.
2.2 Cardiac troponins I and T are biological markers of cardiac muscle death
(cardiomyocyte necrosis). They are released into the circulation, so rise when the
cardiac muscle is damaged. They are used as markers of acute myocardial
infarction along with clinical history taking and electrocardiography (ECG)
monitoring. ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) can usually be
diagnosed by ECG alone. So, the main diagnostic challenge is detecting or ruling
out non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
2.3 The optimum sensitivity of older (non-high-sensitivity) troponin tests (referred to
here as standard troponin tests) for acute myocardial infarction is 10 to 12 hours
after the onset of symptoms. For many people, this means hospital admission and
observation while serial troponin testing is done. To overcome this, high-
sensitivity troponin tests have been developed. These can detect lower levels of
troponin in the blood earlier than standard troponin tests, so enable early rule out
of NSTEMI after the onset of acute chest pain. This could lead to fewer people
being admitted to hospital, earlier discharge for people with normal troponin
levels and earlier intervention for those with a confirmed NSTEMI.
2.4 NICE's 2014 guidance on high-sensitivity troponin tests recommended the
Elecsys troponin T-high sensitive test and ARCHITECT STAT High Sensitive
Troponin-I test as options for the early rule out of NSTEMI in people presenting to
an emergency department with chest pain and suspected acute coronary
syndrome. Since that guidance was published, NICE's guideline on recent-onset
chest pain of suspected cardiac origin has been updated to include high-

 
sensitivity troponin tests. But stakeholder feedback suggests that high-sensitivity
troponin testing used with early rule-out strategies has not been routinely
adopted in the NHS and, if it has, there is wide variation in how it is being done.
This updated assessment is being done to ensure that guidance is based on
evidence including new high-sensitivity tests developed and marketed since
publication of the NICE guidance. It is also to provide more detailed
recommendations on how to use high-sensitivity tests (for example, timing of
testing and using sequential testing strategies) when possible.
The interventions
2.5 All tests included in the assessment are CE marked and available to the NHS.
Access High-Sensitivity Troponin I Assay (Beckman Coulter)
2.6 The Access test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Beckman Coulter
Access 2 and DxI/DxC analysers. The company says that the test's performance
is the same regardless of analyser. It is a paramagnetic particle chemiluminescent
immunoassay for in-vitro quantitative determination of troponin I in serum and
plasma samples. Results are available in 17 minutes. Recommended 99th
percentile cut-offs are:
• 17.5 ng/litre for the whole population
• 11.6 ng/litre for women
• 19.8 ng/litre for men.
Each 99th percentile has a coefficient of variation (CV) of less than 10%. The
test can detect troponin I in more than 97% of the reference population.

 
ARCHITECT STAT High Sensitive Troponin-I assay (Abbott
Diagnostics)
2.7 The ARCHITECT test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Abbott
ARCHITECT i2000SR and i1000SR analysers. The test is a chemiluminescent
microparticle immunoassay for in-vitro quantitative determination of troponin I in
serum and plasma samples. Results are available in 18 minutes. The ARCHITECT
test can detect troponin I in 96% of the reference population. Recommended
99th percentile cut-offs are:
• 26.2 ng/litre for the whole population with a CV of 4%
• 15.6 ng/litre for women (CV 5.3%)
• 34.2 ng/litre for men (CV 3.5%).
Alinity High Sensitive Troponin-I assay (Abbott Diagnostics)
2.8 The Alinity test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Alinity i analyser. It
is a chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay for the quantitative
determination of troponin I in plasma and serum samples. Results are available in
18 minutes. Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs are:
• 26.2 ng/litre for the whole population with a CV of 4.6%
• 15.6 ng/litre for women (CV 5.0%)
• 34.2 ng/litre for men (CV 4.5%).
ADVIA Centaur High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
(Siemens Healthineers)
2.9 The ADVIA Centaur test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Siemens
ADVIA Centaur XP and ADVIA Centaur XPT analysers. It is a magnetic latex
particle chemiluminescent immunoassay for the in-vitro quantitative
determination of troponin I in serum and plasma samples. Test results are
available in 18 minutes. Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs are:

 
• 47.34 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 46.47 ng/litre in serum for the whole
population
• 36.99 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 39.59 ng/litre in serum for women
• 57.27 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 58.05 ng/litre in serum for men.
Each 99th percentile has a CV of less than 10%. The test can detect
troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
Atellica IM High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay (Siemens
Healthineers)
2.10 The Atellica test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Siemens Atellica
IM analyser. It is a magnetic latex particle chemiluminescent immunoassay for the
in-vitro quantitative determination of troponin I in serum and plasma samples.
Test results are available in 10 minutes. Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs
are:
• 45.2 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 45.43 ng/litre in serum for the whole
population
• 34.11 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 38.64 ng/litre in serum for women
• 53.48 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 53.53 ng/litre in serum for men.
Each 99th percentile has a CV of less than 10%. The test can detect
troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
Dimension EXL High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
(Siemens Healthineers)
2.11 The Dimension EXL test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Siemens
Dimension EXL analyser. It is a magnetic latex particle chemiluminescent
immunoassay for the in-vitro quantitative determination of troponin I in serum and
plasma samples. Test results are available in 18 minutes. Recommended 99th

 
percentile cut-offs are:
• 60.4 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 58.2 ng/litre in serum for the whole
population
• 51.4 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 47.8 ng/litre in serum for women
• 76.2 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 71.8 ng/litre in serum for men.
Each 99th percentile has a CV of less than 10%. The test can detect
troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
Dimension Vista High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
(Siemens Healthineers)
2.12 The Dimension Vista test is designed to be used in a laboratory with the Siemens
Dimension Vista analysers. It is a magnetic latex particle chemiluminescent
immunoassay, and is intended for the in-vitro quantitative determination of
troponin I in serum and plasma samples. Test results are available in 10 minutes.
Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs are:
• 58.9 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 57.9 ng/litre in serum for the whole
population
• 53.77 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 51.1 ng/litre in serum for women
• 78.5 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 74.9 ng/litre in serum for men.
Each 99th percentile has a CV of less than 10%. The test can detect
troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
Elecsys troponin T-high sensitive assay (Roche)
2.13 The Elecsys and Elecsys STAT tests are designed to be used in a laboratory on
the Roche cobas e411, e601, and e602 analysers. The company says that
performance is the same when used on these analysers. The test can also be run
on the cobas e801 analyser, which is designed for very high throughput as both a

 
standard and STAT test. The Elecsys test is a sandwich
electrochemiluminescence immunoassay for in-vitro quantitative determination of
troponin T in serum and plasma samples. Results are available in 18 minutes with
the standard test and in 9 minutes with the STAT test. Both tests can detect
troponin T in 57% of the reference population. Recommended 99th percentile
cut-offs are:
• 14.0 ng/litre for the whole population with a CV of less than 10%
• 9.0 ng/litre for women
• 16.8 ng/litre for men.
TriageTrue High Sensitivity Troponin I Test (Quidel
Cardiovascular)
2.14 The TriageTrue test can be used at point of care or in a laboratory with the Triage
MeterPro analyser. It is a fluorescence immunoassay for the in-vitro quantitative
determination of troponin I in EDTA anticoagulated whole blood and plasma
samples. Test results are available in less than 20 minutes. Recommended 99th
percentile cut-offs are:
• 20.5 ng/litre for the whole population with a CV of less than 10%
• 14.4 ng/litre for women
• 25.7 ng/litre for men.
The test can detect troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
VITROS High Sensitivity Troponin I Assay (Ortho Clinical
Diagnostics)
2.15 The VITROS test is designed to be used in a laboratory on the following
analysers: VITROS ECi/ECiQ/3600 Immunodiagnostic Systems and the VITROS
5600/XT 7600 Integrated System. It is an immunometric immunoassay for the in-
vitro quantitative determination of troponin I in serum and plasma samples. Test

 
results are available in 15 minutes. Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs are:
• 11 ng/litre in lithium heparin and serum for the whole population
• 9 ng/litre in lithium heparin and serum for women
• 13 ng/litre in lithium heparin and 12 ng/litre in serum for men.
The test can detect troponin I in more than 50% of the reference population.
VIDAS High sensitive Troponin I assay (bioMérieux)
2.16 The VIDAS test is designed to be used in a laboratory on the following analysers:
VIDAS, MINI VIDAS and VIDAS 3. It is for the in-vitro quantitative determination of
troponin I in serum and plasma (lithium heparin) samples. Test results are
available in 20 minutes. Recommended 99th percentile cut-offs are:
• 19 ng/litre for the whole population
• 11 ng/litre for women
• 25 ng/litre for men.
The comparator
2.17 The comparator was standard troponin testing over 10 to 12 hours from symptom
onset used with early rule-out strategies.

 
3 Evidence
The diagnostics advisory committee considered evidence on high-sensitivity troponin
tests for the early rule out of non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
from several sources. Full details of all the evidence are in the committee papers.
Clinical effectiveness
3.1 The external assessment group (EAG) did a systematic review to identify
evidence on the clinical effectiveness of high-sensitivity troponin tests for the
early rule out of acute myocardial infarction, including NSTEMI, in people who
come to hospital with chest pain. It also considered studies used to develop the
original diagnostics guidance on early rule out of myocardial infarction using high-
sensitivity troponin tests.
3.2 The EAG identified 37 studies that met the inclusion criteria. Test accuracy data
were reported for the following high-sensitivity troponin tests: Elecsys (30
studies), ARCHITECT (9 studies), Atellica (2 studies), ADVIA Centaur (3 studies),
Access (2 studies). One study each reported accuracy data for Dimension Vista,
VITROS, VIDAS and TriageTrue.
3.3 Seven studies reported diagnostic accuracy data for more than 1 test. No studies
were identified that matched the inclusion criteria for the review for Alinity or
Dimension EXL tests. Two randomised controlled trials were included in the
review: High-STEACS and HiSTORIC.
3.4 Of the 37 included studies, 22 were done in Europe (7 in the UK), 5 in Australia
and New Zealand, 6 in the US, 3 in East Asia, and 1 was a worldwide study.
3.5 The randomised controlled trials were quality assessed using the revised
Cochrane risk of bias tool for cluster randomised trials. Studies that evaluated a
single high-sensitivity test were assessed using the QUADAS-2 tool. Studies that
provided data for 2 or more high-sensitivity tests were assessed using the
QUADAS-2C tool.

 
Randomised controlled trials
3.6 Both trials used the ARCHITECT test.
3.7 The High-STEACS trial evaluated the implementation of an early rule-out strategy
in 10 secondary and tertiary care hospitals in Scotland. It compared the rates at
which conditions were reclassified after high-sensitivity troponin tests with the
rates of reclassification after standard troponin testing. It also compared the
subsequent incidence of myocardial infarction and cardiovascular death.
3.8 The HiSTORIC trial also evaluated the implementation of an early rule-out
strategy in 7 acute hospitals in Scotland. The primary outcomes were length of
stay and myocardial infarction or cardiac death after discharge at 30 days. The
results are academic in confidence.
3.9 During the validation phase of High-STEACS (6 to 12 months), results of the high-
sensitivity troponin I test were concealed from the attending clinician, and a
standard cardiac troponin test was used to guide care. A high-sensitivity test was
introduced after 6 months (early implementation) or 12 months (late
implementation).
3.10 In patients whose condition was reclassified in the High-STEACS trial, there were
no differences between high-sensitivity and standard troponin tests in the
primary or any of the secondary efficacy and safety outcome measures
(myocardial infarction, unplanned coronary revascularisation, all-cause death,
death from cardiovascular causes, hospital admission for heart failure and
ischaemic stroke). The median length of stay for patients without myocardial
injury was 7 hours (interquartile range 3 to 24) in the validation phase and
4 hours (interquartile range 3 to 20) in the implementation phase. The authors of
High-STEACS concluded that implementing an early rule-out strategy was not
associated with any increase in myocardial infarction or cardiovascular death
within 1 year of initial presentation.

 
Diagnostic test accuracy
Elecsys troponin T-high sensitive assay
3.11 Summary estimates of sensitivity and specificity from testing a single sample,
using a 99th percentile diagnostic threshold for the general population, were 90%
(95% confidence interval [CI] 85 to 94) and 78% (95% CI 72 to 83) respectively,
based on data from 22 studies. The summary estimates of sensitivity and
specificity, using a single sample and a limit of detection threshold, were 99%
(95% CI 97 to 99) and 36% (95% CI 28 to 45) respectively, based on data from
9 studies. The 8 studies that assessed the diagnostic performance of a limit of
blank threshold in a single sample gave a similarly high summary estimate of
sensitivity of 100% (95% CI 98 to 100), but a reduced specificity of 19% (95% CI
11 to 31). All estimates were similar when the analyses were restricted to studies
that excluded people with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
3.12 Using multiple sample strategies appears to offer better specificity without
substantial loss of sensitivity than using a single sample on presentation and a
very low limit of detection or limit of blank threshold. The European Society of
Cardiology's (ESC) 0/1-hour rule-out pathway combines an initial sample and a
very low limit of detection threshold (5 ng/litre) in patients reporting a minimum
symptom duration of 3 hours. The strategy tests at presentation and 1 hour later
for patients whose acute myocardial infarction is not ruled out by the initial test,
that is, it uses an 'OR' combination. The threshold for repeat testing is an initial
troponin concentration of less than 12 ng/litre with an absolute change in
troponin concentration, from 0 to 1 hour, of less than 3 ng/litre. For NSTEMI, the
sensitivity and specificity estimates for this strategy were 99% (95% CI 98 to 100)
and 68% (95% CI 67 to 70), respectively. Estimates of diagnostic performance
were similar for strategies using an 'AND' combination of initial high-sensitivity
troponin level and absolute change in troponin level.
ARCHITECT STAT High Sensitive Troponin-I assay
3.13 Summary estimates of sensitivity and specificity for a single sample using a
diagnostic threshold of the 99th percentile for the general population were 75%
(95% CI 65 to 82) and 94% (95% CI 94 to 96) respectively, based on data from 5

 
studies. These estimates were similar if the analysis was restricted to studies that
excluded people with STEMI. The summary estimates of sensitivity and
specificity, using a limit of detection threshold (2 ng/litre) in a single sample taken
on presentation, were 100% (95% CI 99 to 100) and 21% (95% CI 16 to 26)
respectively, based on data from 4 studies in NSTEMI.
3.14 For multiple sample strategies, the High-STEACS pathway was used as follows:
• in the whole population, symptoms for 2 hours or more and a troponin
concentration of less than 5 ng/litre at 0 hours, or
• in women, 16 ng/litre or lower when measured 3 hours from presentation and
an absolute change of less than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 3 hours, or
• in men, 34 ng/litre or lower when measured 3 hours from presentation and an
absolute change of less than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 3 hours.
3.15 Using the High-STEACS pathway in this way appeared to offer increased
specificity without substantial loss of sensitivity compared with a single sample
on presentation and a risk stratification threshold of less than 5 ng/litre. The
sensitivity and specificity estimates for this strategy were 99% (95% CI 97 to 100)
and 76% (95% CI 73 to 78) respectively, for NSTEMI. The ESC 0/1-hour rule-out
pathway reported a lower specificity than the High-STEACS pathway. It used an
initial sample and a limit of detection threshold of less than 2 ng/litre, or repeat
testing combining an initial troponin concentration of less than 5 ng/litre and an
absolute change in troponin concentration, from 0 to 1 hour, of less than 2 ng/
litre. Summary sensitivity and specificity estimates were 99% (95% CI 98 to 100)
and 57% (95% CI 56 to 59) respectively for NSTEMI.
Access High-Sensitivity Troponin I Assay
3.16 The 2 studies evaluating the Access test each assessed a different multiple
sample strategy. One followed the ESC 0/1-hour rule-out pathway (initial sample
and a limit of detection threshold of less than 4 ng/litre, or repeat testing
combining an initial concentration of less than 5 ng/litre and an absolute change
in troponin concentration, from 0 to 1 hour, of less than 4 ng/litre), giving
sensitivity and specificity estimates of 99% (95% CI 94 to 100) and 70% (95% CI

 
66 to 74) respectively for NSTEMI. The second study assessed a similar strategy,
but with repeat testing at 2 hours. The sensitivity estimates were similar for the 2
strategies, but the specificity of the 2-hour repeat testing strategy was higher
than that of the 1-hour strategy.
VIDAS High sensitive Troponin I assay
3.17 The study evaluating the VIDAS test assessed a multiple sample strategy, with
samples taken on presentation and at 2 hours using a threshold of less than 2 ng/
litre at presentation, or less than 6 ng/litre at presentation and at 2 hours. The
reported sensitivity and specificity estimates were 98% (95% CI 92 to 100) and
64% (95% CI 59 to 68) respectively for NSTEMI.
VITROS High Sensitivity Troponin I Assay
3.18 The study evaluating the VITROS test assessed the ESC 0/1-hour rule-out
pathway. This combined an initial sample and a limit of detection threshold of less
than 1 ng/litre, or repeat testing combining an initial troponin concentration of
less than 2 ng/litre and an absolute change in troponin concentration, from 0 to
1 hour, of less than 1 ng/litre. The reported sensitivity and specificity estimates
were 100% (95% CI 95 to 100) and 60% (95% CI 55 to 64) respectively for
NSTEMI.
TriageTrue High-Sensitivity Troponin I Test
3.19 The study evaluating the TriageTrue test assessed the ESC 0/1-hour rule-out
pathway. This combined an initial sample and a limit of detection threshold of less
than 4 ng/litre, or repeat testing combining an initial troponin concentration of
less than 5 ng/litre and an absolute change in troponin concentration, from 0 to
1 hour, of less than 3 ng/litre. The reported sensitivity of this strategy was 100%
(95% CI 97 to 100) and the specificity was 66% (95% CI 62 to 70) for NSTEMI.

 
ADVIA Centaur high-sensitivity Troponin I assay
3.20 Three studies evaluated the ADVIA Centaur test. Using a rule-out threshold of
2 ng/litre in a single sample taken on presentation, the sensitivity and specificity
estimates were 100% (95% CI 99 to 100) and 23% (95% CI 21 to 25) respectively
for NSTEMI. Two multiple sample strategies were evaluated. One followed the
ESC 0/1-hour rule-out pathway. This combined an initial sample and a limit of
detection threshold of less than 3 ng/litre, or repeat testing combining an initial
concentration of less than 6 ng/litre and an absolute change in troponin
concentration, from 0 to 1 hour, of less than 3 ng/litre. The sensitivity and
specificity estimates for this strategy were 99% (95% CI 95 to 100) and 56% (95%
CI 52 to 60) respectively for NSTEMI. The second study assessed a similar
strategy, but with higher thresholds and repeat testing at 2 hours. The sensitivity
and specificity estimates for this strategy were 100% (95% CI 95 to 100) and 67%
(95% CI 61 to 72) respectively for NSTEMI.
Atellica High-Sensitivity Troponin I Assay
3.21 Using a rule-out threshold of 2 ng/litre, in a single sample taken on presentation,
the sensitivity and specificity estimates for the Atellica test were 100% (95% CI
98 to 100) and 26% (95% CI 24 to 28) respectively for NSTEMI. Sensitivity and
specificity estimates for the High-STEACS pathway (symptoms for at least
2 hours and an initial troponin concentration of less than 5 ng/litre, or a troponin
concentration of 34 ng/litre or less in women, or 53 ng/litre or less in men at
3 hours and an absolute change in concentration from 0 to 3 hours, of less than
3 ng/litre) were 98% (95% CI 95 to 100) and 74% (95% CI 72 to 76) respectively
for NSTEMI.
Dimension Vista High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Assay
3.22 The study of the Dimension Vista test assessed a strategy using measurements
done at baseline using a troponin concentration threshold of less than 5 ng/litre
and an absolute change of less than 2 ng/litre within 1 hour. The sensitivity of the
strategy was 100% (95% CI 97 to 100) and specificity was 66% (95% CI 62 to 69)
for NSTEMI.

 
Diagnostic accuracy in relevant subgroups
3.23 The EAG identified some data on the subgroups described in the scope for this
guidance. In a study using the Elecsys test and a 99th percentile threshold on a
single sample at presentation, a higher sensitivity for any acute myocardial
infarction was estimated in people over 70 than for people aged 70 or under (97%
[95% CI 92 to 99] and 88% [95% CI 78 to 94] respectively). The estimate of
sensitivity for people over 70 was also higher than the corresponding summary
estimates from all 22 studies that used the 99th percentile diagnostic threshold.
There was a similar pattern for people with a high pre-test probability
(determined by clinical judgement of cardiovascular risk factors, type of chest
pain, physical findings and electrocardiography [ECG] abnormalities) compared
with those with a low to moderate pre-test probability. The same was found for
people without pre-existing cardiovascular disease compared with those with
pre-existing cardiovascular disease.
3.24 Only the High-STEACS trial reported using sex-specific thresholds. Data from this
study appeared to show that testing using a single sample taken on presentation
is markedly more sensitive if sex-specific 99th percentile cut-offs are used,
compared with a standard troponin test with a uniform threshold. This is
particularly true in women, for whom the 99th percentile is lower. This study also
used sex-specific thresholds as part of a multiple test strategy: the High-STEACS
pathway. It is unclear whether using sex-specific thresholds in this strategy
offers any advantage over using a single general population threshold. This is
because no equivalent strategy, using a single universal threshold, was
evaluated. Other studies reported data on men and women using a single general
population threshold in each group. Results from a study on the Elecsys test
showed very similar accuracy estimates for the subgroups, although a study on
the Dimension Vista reported a lower sensitivity and specificity in men than in
women.
3.25 Two studies on the Elecsys test and 2 on the ARCHITECT test reported data on
how diagnostic performance varies with renal function. All studies show a
decrease in specificity as renal function decreases.

 
Comparative diagnostic accuracy for more than 1 test
3.26 Seven studies reported accuracy data for more than 1 test.
3.27 The APACE study provided data on the ESC 0/1-hour pathway using the Elecsys,
ARCHITECT and ADVIA Centaur tests. It also provided data on the ESC 0/1-hour
pathway using the Access, VITROS and TriageTrue tests, but these results came
from different patient subgroups and were reported in different publications. Data
showed that the ESC 0/1-hour pathway performed consistently across all 6 high-
sensitivity troponin tests evaluated with sensitivity estimates of 98% or higher.
3.28 Three other studies, ADAPT, ROMI-3, and TRUST, compared the Elecsys and
ARCHITECT tests. Although the sensitivity estimates for the Elecsys test, using
the 99th percentile and a single sample at presentation, were higher than those
for the ARCHITECT test, both had sensitivity estimates of less than 97%. When
the limit of detection threshold was used with a single sample at presentation,
sensitivity estimates were comparable for the Elecsys test and the ARCHITECT
test, and were always 99% or higher.
3.29 The High-STEACS trial provided data on the rule-out performance of 3 strategies
(ESC 0/1-hour, ESC 0/3-hour and High-STEACS 0/3-hour) using the ARCHITECT
and Atellica tests. It is unclear whether both tests were evaluated in the same
subgroup of people in the study. Data showed that the sensitivity of the ESC 0/
1-hour pathway was lower using the Atellica test (94% [95% CI 79 to 99]) than
using the ARCHITECT test (100% [95% CI 91 to 100]). The sensitivity and
specificity estimates for the High-STEACS 0/3-hour rule-out pathway were
similar using either test (both had sensitivity estimates of 98% or more). The ESC
0/3-hour rule-out pathway in this study consisted of:
• symptoms for 6 hours or more and a troponin concentration of 16 ng/litre or
less in women or 34 ng/litre or less in men at 0 hours, or
• a troponin concentration of 16 ng/litre or less in women or 34 ng/litre or less
in men at 3 hours, or
• an absolute change of less than 50% of the 99th percentile at 0 to 3 hours.
The sensitivity and specificity estimates for the ESC 0/3-hour rule-out

 
pathway were both less than 97% using either test.
3.30 The HIGH-US study compared 2 Siemens tests (Atellica and ADVIA Centaur),
using 3 low thresholds and a single sample at presentation. The results showed
sensitivity estimates were 99% or more for both tests for all thresholds.
3.31 The BEST study compared 2 single sample at presentation strategies using the
ADVIA Centaur test (threshold of 3 ng/litre) and Elecsys test (limit of detection
[5 ng/litre] threshold). Data were reported in separate publications with different
numbers of people. The sensitivity estimates were 99% for both tests, but the
Elecsys test had a higher specificity (47% [95% CI 43 to 51]) than the ADVIA
Centaur test (33% [95% CI 30 to 36]).
Cost effectiveness
3.32 The EAG did a search to identify evidence on the cost effectiveness of high-
sensitivity troponin tests for the early rule out of acute myocardial infarction,
including NSTEMI. The EAG also developed a de novo economic model to assess
the cost effectiveness of the different testing strategies.
Review of economic evidence
3.33 Studies were eligible if they reported a full economic analysis of the cost
effectiveness of either high-sensitivity troponin testing or standard troponin
testing. They also had to include survival or quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) as
an outcome measure.
3.34 Five studies identified in the original assessment report and 1 new study were
included in the systematic review. Results varied in the 5 studies from the original
report, and the EAG concluded that there was uncertainty about the cost
effectiveness of diagnostic strategies using high-sensitivity troponin testing. The
EAG noted that the key drivers of cost effectiveness in the included studies were
the accuracy of high-sensitivity troponin tests, and the efficiency of decision
making once test results were available.

 
3.35 The most recent study (Ambavane et al. 2017) reported that a 1-hour strategy
using high-sensitivity troponin testing had higher sensitivity (87% compared with
69%) but lower specificity (96% compared with 97%) than standard care. The
reference standard used to calculate diagnostic accuracy was determination of
final diagnosis based on a comprehensive review of medical records. Total costs
were less for the 1-hour strategy compared with standard care (£2,480
compared with £4,561). This was mainly because of a shorter length of stay in
the emergency department.
Economic analysis
3.36 The EAG developed a de novo economic model to explore the cost effectiveness
of high-sensitivity troponin tests for the early rule out of acute myocardial
infarction, including NSTEMI, in people with acute chest pain (used up to 4 hours
from the onset of chest pain or at presentation). The model compared high-
sensitivity tests with standard troponin T or I testing, or both, on admission and
at 10 to 12 hours after the onset of symptoms. The population in the model was
people presenting to the emergency department with suspected non-ST-
segment elevation acute coronary syndrome, who have no major comorbidities
needing hospitalisation (for example, heart failure or arrhythmia) and in whom
STEMI has been ruled out.
3.37 Only high-sensitivity troponin tests with a sensitivity of 97% or above were used
in the economic model, based on expert opinion of the minimum sensitivity
acceptable in clinical practice. The strategies evaluated are described in table 1.
Table 1 Test strategies evaluated in the economic model
Strategy
Test Strategy
number
99th percentile threshold (under 14 ng/litre at 0 hours AND
1 Elecsys
3 hours)
2 Elecsys Limit of detection under 5 ng/litre at 0 hours
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 5 ng/
litre at 0 hours
3 Elecsys
OR under 12 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less
than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour

 
Strategy
Test Strategy
number
Under 8 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less than
4 Elecsys
3 ng/litre at 0 to 0.5 hours
Under 12 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less than
5 Elecsys
3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour
Dimension Under 5 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less than
6
Vista 2 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hours
Under 12 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less than
7 ARCHITECT
3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 2 ng/
litre at 0 hours
8 ARCHITECT
OR under 5 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less
than 2 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hours
High-STEACS pathway: symptoms for 2 hours or more AND under
5 ng/litre at 0 hours
9 ARCHITECT
OR 16 ng/litre or more (women) and 34 ng/litre or more (men) at
3 hours AND an absolute change of less than 3 ng/litre
10 ARCHITECT Under 4 ng/litre at 0 hours
ADVIA
11 Under 2 ng/litre at 0 hours
Centaur
Under 3 ng/litre at 0 hours
ADVIA
12 OR under 8 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less
Centaur
than 7 ng/litre at 0 to 2 hours
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 3 ng/
ADVIA litre at 0 hours
13
Centaur OR under 6 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less
than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour
ADVIA
14 Under 5 ng/litre at 0 hours
Centaur
15 Atellica Under 2 ng/litre at 0 hours

 
Strategy
Test Strategy
number
High-STEACS pathway: symptoms for 2 hours or more AND under
5 ng/litre at 0 hours
16 Atellica
OR 34 ng/litre or less (women) and 53 ng/litre or less (men) at
3 hours AND an absolute change of less than 3 ng/litre
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 4 ng/
litre at 0 hours
17 Access
OR under 5 ng/litre and an absolute change of less than 4 ng/litre
at 0 to 1 hour
Symptoms over 3 hours AND under 4 ng/litre at 0 hours
18 Access OR under 5 ng/litre and an absolute change of less than 5 ng/litre
at 0 to 2 hours
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 1 ng/
litre at 0 hours
19 VITROS
OR under 2 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of under
1 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour
Under 2 ng/litre at 0 hours
20 VIDAS
OR under 6 ng/litre at 0 AND 2 hours
ESC 0/1-hour pathway: symptoms over 3 hours AND under 4 ng/
litre at 0 hours
21 TriageTrue
OR under 5 ng/litre at 0 hours AND an absolute change of less
than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour
Model structure
3.38 The model structure from the original diagnostics assessment report was used.
This model structure was adapted from the health technology assessment report
from Goodacre et al. (2013). It consists of a decision tree and a state-transition
model. The decision tree was used to model the 30-day outcomes after
presentation, based on test results and the accompanying treatment decision.
The following health states were included:
• no acute coronary syndrome and no unstable angina (no ACS, no UA)
• unstable angina (UA)

 
• post-acute myocardial infarction, treated and untreated (post-AMI)
• post-acute myocardial infarction with reinfarction (post-AMI with reinfarction)
• death.
3.39 People presenting at the emergency department with suspected non-ST
elevation acute coronary syndrome were tested and results were classified as
either true positive, false positive, false negative or true negative. These people
entered health states as listed (people could also die after treatment or be
discharged):
• People with true positive test results were correctly treated for acute
myocardial infarction and were allocated to 'non-fatal AMI (treated)'.
• People with false positive test results were considered to have no acute
myocardial infarction, but did not meet early rule-out criteria. They were
subdivided between 'no ACS, no UA' and 'UA'. It was assumed that people
with false positive test results would remain in the hospital longer but would
not be treated for acute myocardial infarction.
• People with true negative test results were considered not to be treated for
acute myocardial infarction and were subdivided between 'no ACS, no UA'
and 'UA'.
• People with false negative test results were assumed to have untreated acute
myocardial infarction resulting in increased reinfarction and mortality
probabilities for 1 year and were allocated to 'non-fatal AMI (untreated)'.
3.40 The long-term consequences in terms of costs and QALYs were estimated using
a state-transition cohort model with a lifetime time horizon (60 years) and a cycle
time of 1 year (except for the first cycle which was adjusted to 335.25 days to
ensure that the decision tree period and the first cycle summed to 1 year).
Discount rates of 3.5% and a half-cycle correction were applied for both costs
and effects.

 
Model inputs
3.41 Estimates for the model input parameters were retrieved from the literature and
from consulting experts. Accuracy estimates were derived from the systematic
review component of the assessment. The proportion of people testing positive
or negative was based on the estimated accuracy of the testing strategies
considered (table 2) and the estimated prevalence of NSTEMI in the UK (12.2%).
Table 2 Test accuracy inputs
Sensitivity Specificity
Number Test Strategy
(SE) (SE)
Standard 1.00 (- 1.00 (-
0 At presentation and after 10 to 12 hours
troponin ) )
1.00 0.77
1 Elecsys 99th percentile at 0 hours AND 3 hours
(0.03) (0.08)
0.99 0.35
2 Elecsys Limit of detection at 0 hours
(0.01) (0.05)
0.99 0.68
3 Elecsys ESC 0/1-hour pathway
(0.01) (0.01)
Less than 8 ng/litre at 0 hours AND change of less 1.00 0.45
4 Elecsys
than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 0.5 hours (0.02) (0.02)
Less than 12 ng/litre at 0 hours AND change of less 0.98 0.73
5 Elecsys
than 3 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour (0.01) (0.01)
Dimension Less than 5 ng/litre at 0 hours AND change less 1.00 0.66
6
Vista than 2 ng/litre at 0 to 1 hour (0.02) (0.02)
1.00 0.21
7 ARCHITECT Limit of detection at 0 hours
(0.00) (0.03)
0.99 0.57
8 ARCHITECT ESC 0/1-hour pathway
(0.00) (0.01)
0.99 0.76
9 ARCHITECT High-STEACS pathway
(0.01) (0.01)
0.99 0.50
10 ARCHITECT Less than 4 ng/litre at 0 hours
(0.01) (0.01)

 
Sensitivity Specificity
Number Test Strategy
(SE) (SE)
ADVIA 1.00 0.23
11 Less than 2 ng/litre at 0 hours
Centaur (0.00) (0.01)
Less than 3 ng/litre at 0 hours OR less than 8 ng/
ADVIA 1.00 0.67
12 litre at 0 hours AND change of less than 7 ng/litre
Centaur (0.01) (0.03)
at 0 to 2 hours
ADVIA 0.99 0.56
13 ESC 0/1-hour pathway
Centaur (0.01) (0.02)
ADVIA 0.99 0.52
14 Less than 5 ng/litre at 0 hours
Centaur (0.01) (0.01)
1.00 0.26
15 Atellica Less than 2 ng/litre at 0 hours
(0.01) (0.01)
0.98 0.74
16 Atellica High-STEACS pathway
(0.01) (0.01)
0.99 0.70
17 Access ESC 0/1-hour pathway
(0.02) (0.02)
Symptoms at more than 3 hours AND less than
0.98 0.83
18 Access 4 ng/litre at 0 hour OR less than 5 ng/litre and
(0.02) (0.01)
change of less than 5 ng/litre at 0 to 2 hours
1.00 0.60
19 VITROS ESC 0/1-hour pathway
(0.01) (0.02)
Less than 2 ng/litre at 0 hour OR less than 6 ng/litre 0.98 0.64
20 VIDAS
at 0 AND 2 hours (0.02) (0.02)
1.00 0.66
21 TriageTrue ESC 0/1-hour pathway
(0.01) (0.02)
ESC, European Society of Cardiology; SE, standard error; ng/litre is nanograms troponin
per litre of blood.
3.42 Test-specific resource use consisted of the number of tests done and the
duration of hospital stay in hours before discharge or acute myocardial infarction
treatment. For test strategies that involved a subsequent test conditional on the

 
outcome of the first test, the rule-out rate for the presentation sample was used
to calculate the number of subsequent tests. The resource use included a delay
from the time at which sampling could be done to the time at which results
became available (2 hours) and delay between arrival at hospital and troponin
assessment starting (1 hour).
3.43 Health state costs were taken from a retrospective cohort study done in the UK
(Danese et al. 2016). Acute myocardial infarction treatment costs were based on
NHS reference costs and hospital stay costs were based on data from the
Personal Social Services Research Unit.
3.44 In the base case, test costs were assumed to be identical for all tests (£2.50)
except for the point-of-care test (£25.00, based on information provided by
Quidel). A scenario analysis was done using test-specific costs and assuming
that costs relating to the analyser and staff time were identical for all strategies.
3.45 Age-dependent utility scores from the UK general population were calculated for
people in the 'no ACS, no UA' health state. These age-dependent utility scores
were combined with age-dependent disutility values for acute myocardial
infarction, to calculate utility values for the 'post-AMI' health states (with or
without reinfarction). Utility values for the 'UA' health state were calculated based
on the 'post-MI' utility values and assuming a utility increment of 0.010.
Assumptions
3.46 The following assumptions were applied in the base-case analysis:
• Standard troponin testing (at presentation and after 10 to 12 hours) has
perfect accuracy.
• Compared with acute myocardial infarctions occurring during the decision
tree period, all acute myocardial infarctions (either first or reinfarction)
occurring in the state-transition model are diagnosed correctly, so are
treated.
• Unstable angina is always correctly diagnosed, so is treated.
• The reinfarction probability for the 'post-AMI with reinfarction' health state is

 
equal to the reinfarction probability for the 'post-AMI' health state.
• The increased post-acute myocardial infarction reinfarction and mortality
probabilities for untreated acute myocardial infarction were assumed to last
1 year. After this a relative risk of 1.0 was applied (for untreated compared
with treated acute myocardial infarction).
• There is no additional benefit of starting treatment early, so treatment effect
for high-sensitivity strategies is equal to treatment effect for standard
troponin strategies.
• All 30-day deaths (after presentation at the emergency department) are due
to fatal acute myocardial infarction events and will receive the associated
costs.
3.47 For the base case, it was assumed that people who tested negative on standard
troponin tests and positive on high-sensitivity troponin tests would have a life
expectancy and quality of life equal to people with true negative test results, but
this assumption is debatable. A meta-analysis by Liplinski et al. (2015) showed
that people with a negative standard troponin test and positive high-sensitivity
troponin test have an increased risk of reinfarction and mortality compared with
those who test negative on both standard troponin and high-sensitivity troponin
tests. Although this risk was not as high as in people with both positive standard
troponin and positive high-sensitivity troponin tests, it could still be considered
prognostically important. A secondary analysis was done in which the risk of
acute myocardial infarction and mortality was adjusted for people with false
positive results.
Results
3.48 In the base case, standard troponin testing was the most effective and the most
expensive strategy. But other testing strategies with a sensitivity of 100%
(subject to uncertainty) were almost equally as effective, resulting in the same
QALY gain up to 4 decimal places. Compared with standard troponin testing,
high-sensitivity troponin testing resulted in probabilistic incremental cost-
effectiveness ratios (ICERs) ranging between £34,307 and £36,842,603 savings
per QALY lost.

 
3.49 In the secondary analysis, standard troponin was the cheapest and the least
effective testing strategy. Compared with standard troponin testing, high-
sensitivity troponin testing resulted in probabilistic ICERs ranging between
£4,043 and £6,148 per QALY gained.
3.50 For all scenario analyses of the secondary analysis, results were similar to those
from the secondary analysis base case. Standard troponin remained the
cheapest and the least effective testing strategy (deterministic analysis). In all
scenario analyses of the secondary analysis, high-sensitivity troponin testing
compared with standard troponin testing resulted in ICERs less than £10,000 per
QALY gained.
3.51 One-way sensitivity analyses were done including all parameters that were
changed in the probabilistic sensitivity analysis. In the secondary analysis, the
parameters that had a notable effect on the estimated cost-effectiveness
estimates were:
• 30-day mortality for untreated acute myocardial infarction
• mortality 1 year after treated and untreated acute myocardial infarction
• discount rate used for outcomes
• relative mortality for people who had a true positive result compared with
those who had a false positive result.
At extreme values (based on 95% confidence intervals) of these inputs,
standard troponin testing remains cheaper and less effective than the high-
sensitivity troponin tests.

 
4 Committee discussion
Quick, accurate tests may reduce anxiety for
patients and carers
4.1 The committee heard from a patient expert who highlighted the stresses and
fears that patients and their families experience when attending the emergency
department with chest pain. Reducing waiting times is important for patients.
Technologies that reduce the time taken from sample to clinical decision, while
providing good diagnostic accuracy, may help reduce patient anxiety. Patients
may be reassured that they are having the most appropriate treatment with tests
that provide an accurate result.
Flexibility on tests and strategies helps hospitals
4.2 NICE has previously recommended high-sensitivity troponin for early rule out of
acute myocardial infarction, so most emergency departments are already set up
for high-sensitivity troponin testing. Many have implemented early rule-out
strategies as routine practice. The committee considered that there were
practical issues around early rule-out strategies that incorporate serial testing but
that these could be resolved in practice. It also considered that, if more tests and
different testing strategies were found to be cost effective and were
recommended, this would help with procurement and give hospitals more
flexibility to implement a strategy that works for them.
Clinical effectiveness
The comparative accuracy of the different tests is uncertain
4.3 There were concerns about the level of clinical evidence available for some of the
tests. Most diagnostic accuracy results related to the Elecsys (30 studies) and

 
ARCHITECT (9 studies) tests. Other tests had less evidence available but were
mostly still acceptable. The committee noted that there was also limited evidence
comparing the diagnostic performance of 1 test with another. This meant that
although there may be differences in performance between the tests, it is difficult
to estimate these differences with any certainty.
The sensitivity of single-sample early rule-out strategies varies
depending on which threshold is used
4.4 Results from the diagnostic accuracy studies showed that strategies that test a
single sample on presentation using a threshold at or close to the limit of
detection gave high sensitivity but low specificity. However, the committee
commented that single sample strategies can be useful to rule out non-ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) early in emergency
departments and, for this purpose, specificity is not a priority. There were
concerns about the consistency of different analysers to provide accurate results
at these low thresholds. However, clinical experts commented that samples with
results close to these low thresholds would be from people considered very low
risk and would have a good prognosis regardless of treatment. In contrast, results
from diagnostic accuracy studies showed that a single test strategy using the
99th percentile threshold had sensitivity estimates too low to be safely used in
clinical practice.
Multiple sample early rule-out strategies have better specificity
than single-sample strategies
4.5 Results from the diagnostic accuracy studies showed that multiple sample early
rule-out strategies, that is, those that included a second rule-out step, had better
specificity than single-sample strategies using a very low threshold. Multiple
sample strategies also maintained high levels of sensitivity. However, clinical
experts commented that it was difficult to make direct comparisons of the
different test strategies based on specificity because the number of true
negatives would be affected by the prevalence of NSTEMI in each of the different
study populations.

 
High-sensitivity troponin tests should be used alongside clinical
judgement
4.6 Clinical experts noted that the clinical context in which decisions on discharging
or admitting someone to hospital is important, and that decisions should never be
based solely on the results of a high-sensitivity troponin test. For example, a
person with a negative high-sensitivity troponin test result should not be
discharged without further investigations if they look visibly unwell or if the
sample was collected too soon after the suspected cardiac event, a practice that
could result in a false negative result.
Using sex-specific 99th percentile thresholds could reduce
inequality in women's treatment
4.7 Clinical experts explained that there was consistent evidence from reference
range studies that the 99th percentile threshold differs between men and
women. For the Elecsys and ARCHITECT tests, the 99th percentile upper
reference limit for women is much lower than the general (mixed) population 99th
percentile. The High-STEACS trial was the only strategy included in the cost-
effectiveness modelling to use sex-specific 99th percentile thresholds in an early
rule-out strategy. But it did not provide a direct comparison with a general
population 99th percentile threshold. The committee therefore considered that
the evidence on using sex-specific 99th percentile thresholds in early rule-out
strategies was unclear. Clinical experts noted that sex-specific 99th percentile
thresholds were sometimes used in clinical practice to help diagnose NSTEMI,
but that there was no evidence that using them affected clinical outcomes. They
noted that the ongoing CODE-MI study aims to evaluate the effect of using the
sex-specific 99th percentile threshold for women for high-sensitivity cardiac
troponin. This will be compared with the general (mixed) population 99th
percentile threshold, for the diagnosis, treatment and outcomes of women
presenting to the emergency department with cardiac chest pain. The committee
noted that there was a wider equality issue because women with acute
myocardial infarction are generally under-diagnosed and under-treated compared
with men. The committee considered that using sex-specific 99th percentile
thresholds to help diagnose NSTEMI could be a step towards reducing this health
inequality. It concluded that, when NSTEMI is not ruled out using early rule-out

 
test strategies, NICE's guideline on recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac
origin may be used to help diagnose myocardial infarction, and the use of sex-
specific thresholds at the 99th percentile should be considered (see section 5.2).
Randomised controlled trial evidence shows early rule-out
strategies do not negatively affect health
4.8 The committee considered evidence from 2 randomised controlled trials, High-
STEACS and HiSTORIC. It noted that the authors of High-STEACS concluded that
the implementation of an early rule-out strategy was not associated with any
increase in myocardial infarction or cardiovascular death within 1 year of initial
presentation. The HiSTORIC trial was submitted to NICE as academic-in-
confidence evidence. The committee concluded that evidence from the
randomised controlled trials, which reported end clinical outcomes, strongly
supported using high-sensitivity troponin tests with early rule-out strategies in
clinical practice.
The TriageTrue point-of-care test is innovative but its diagnostic
accuracy is uncertain
4.9 The committee noted that the TriageTrue point-of-care test had a turnaround
time of around 20 minutes and had the potential to be an important development
in the field. The rapid time to test results could have benefits because of a
reduced length of time spent waiting for a result in the emergency department
(see section 4.1). Only 1 study was available on the TriageTrue test. In this study
troponin levels were tested in stored plasma samples rather than the whole blood
samples used in clinical practice. The committee noted that the evidence did not
reflect how the test would be used in clinical practice at the point of care. It
concluded that further evidence on TriageTrue's diagnostic performance when
used on whole blood at the point of care is needed before the test can be
recommended for use in clinical practice.

 
The Alinity, Dimension EXL and Elecsys STAT tests are likely to
have the same performance as alternative versions of tests
4.10 The Alinity and Dimension EXL tests were not included in the economic model
because there were no direct diagnostic accuracy data for them in the systematic
review. However, the committee noted that these tests were based on the same
methods and principles, and used the same reagents as other tests that were
included in the modelling. The committee heard that the Alinity test was a newer
version of the ARCHITECT test and that the Dimension EXL test was a different
version of the Vista test, but the tests were all run on different analysers. It noted
further that the Elecsys STAT test was the same in terms of technical
specification and performance as the Elecsys troponin T-high sensitive test, and
is run on the same analysers. The committee concluded that the diagnostic
accuracy of these different versions of the tests should be comparable. It also
concluded that it was the responsibility of individual laboratories to assess the
equivalency of these tests in practice, and to validate their diagnostic
performance against their current system. This would be achieved in part by
participating in external quality assessment schemes.
Cost effectiveness
Only including early rule-out strategies with a minimum
sensitivity of 97% in the economic analysis is acceptable
4.11 Only early rule-out strategies with a sensitivity of 97% or more were used in the
cost-effectiveness modelling, based on expert opinion about the minimum
sensitivity acceptable in clinical practice. The committee noted that this approach
could mean that some potentially cost-effective strategies were excluded from
the economic modelling. But overall it agreed that it was an acceptable approach
that was necessary to keep the number of test strategies in the economic model
manageable and ensure that those considered were likely to be safe in practice.
The prognostic benefits associated with a false positive high-
sensitivity troponin test should be incorporated into decision

 
making
4.12 The secondary analysis incorporated prognostic benefits associated with false
positive high-sensitivity troponin test results. Clinical experts noted that it is now
widely accepted that people with a negative standard troponin test and a positive
high-sensitivity troponin test (classified as false positives in the analysis) have an
increased risk of reinfarction and mortality compared with people who have a
negative result from both tests. The committee concluded that the secondary
analysis was most appropriate for decision making.
All early rule-out test strategies in the model are cost effective
compared with standard troponin testing at 0 hours and 12 hours
4.13 Compared with standard troponin testing, high-sensitivity troponin test strategies
resulted in incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) of less than £7,000 per
quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained. These ICERs are below £20,000 per
QALY gained, which NICE would typically consider to be cost effective. The
committee noted that there were only small differences in costs and QALYs
between the different test strategies included in the economic model, and
recalled its previous conclusion that it was not possible to indirectly compare the
tests and early rule-out strategies. The committee concluded that it was not
possible to differentiate between the different test strategies, and that all early
rule-out strategies had the potential to be recommended for clinical practice,
provided that each test used with them had enough diagnostic accuracy data.
The results of the economic model are robust to changes in the
input parameter values
4.14 The model results were robust to changes in the input parameter values, for
example, the number of admissions based on the specificity of the test strategy
and the prevalence of NSTEMI. Early rule-out strategies with lower specificities
would likely result in fewer people being discharged from hospital, but this does
not have a substantial effect on the cost-effectiveness results. In addition, clinical
experts noted that people having standard troponin testing and who get a
negative test result would probably have a hospital length of stay of 24 hours

 
rather than the 14 hours assumed in the economic model. So the benefits of
using early rule-out strategies may have been underestimated. The external
assessment group (EAG) commented that changing this assumption would be
unlikely to affect the model results.
Recommending a range of different high-sensitivity troponin
tests gives greater flexibility to NHS trusts
4.15 Some of the tests had lower levels of clinical evidence than others. But the
diagnostic performance and costs of all the tests used in the modelling were
comparable (except for the test cost for TriageTrue). There was no strong
evidence to differentiate one test over another (see section 4.3), and when used
in the early rule-out strategies all were cost effective compared with the standard
troponin test (see section 4.13). The committee noted that recommending a
range of tests would benefit hospitals by enabling them to operate within existing
equipment contracts or investments in a particular platform. It concluded that
recommending a range of high-sensitivity troponin tests gives greater flexibility
to NHS trusts and enables them to work with any local restrictions or equipment
contracts.
Recommending a range of early rule-out strategies means
hospitals can use one that works for their emergency department
4.16 The original NICE diagnostics guidance on troponin tests for myocardial infarction
recommended strategies that test at 0 hours and 3 hours, report absolute values
and use an upper reference limit at the 99th percentile. The committee noted that
much more evidence is now available on different early rule-out strategies. The
committee considered the different strategies included in the model:
• single-sample strategies using a threshold at or near to the limit of detection
• multiple sample strategies in which all patients would be tested at baseline
and again at 1 to 3 hours after the initial test
• multiple sample strategies in which people only had a second test (1 hour to
3 hours after the initial test) if the first test result could not be used to rule

 
out acute myocardial infarction.
The multiple sample strategies incorporated different thresholds, including
those at or close to the limit of detection, the general (mixed) population
99th percentile, and sex-specific 99th percentiles. The committee recalled
that all single-sample strategies and multiple sample strategies included in
the model were highly sensitive, that is, they had a low false negative rate
(see sections 4.4 and 4.5). It considered that strategies in which people
could be safely discharged after the first test could be beneficial because
fewer people would have to remain in the emergency department for a
second test. The committee noted further that all strategies were cost
effective compared with a standard troponin test strategy (see section 4.13).
The committee concluded that recommending a range of early rule-out
strategies would enable hospitals to use strategies that worked with the set
up of their emergency department.
Further diagnostic accuracy evidence is needed before the
TriageTrue test can be recommended for routine clinical use
4.17 The TriageTrue point-of-care test, when used in the European Society of
Cardiology 0/1-hour pathway, was cost effective compared with a standard
troponin test strategy, with an ICER of less than £5,000 per QALY gained. The
committee considered that the potential benefits associated with the rapid
turnaround times of point-of-care tests (see section 4.9) may not have been fully
captured in the economic model. But the committee was concerned about the
evidence used to provide the diagnostic accuracy inputs in the model, so
concluded that further research was needed on the TriageTrue test before it
could be recommended for routine clinical use.

 
Research considerations
Further research to understand the 99th percentile in population
subgroups would be useful
4.18 Some evidence supported using sex-specific 99th percentile thresholds in clinical
practice in men and women but overall their value in early rule-out is unclear (see
section 4.7). The clinical experts said that there are much less data on the 99th
percentile in other subgroups, such as older or younger people, people with or
without renal disease and black, Asian and minority ethnic groups. The
committee considered that it would be helpful to have a better understanding of
differences in the 99th percentile between these subgroups.

 
5 Recommendations for further research
5.1 Further research is recommended on the diagnostic performance of the
TriageTrue high-sensitivity troponin test using samples at point of care.
5.2 Further research is recommended on how using sex-specific 99th percentile
thresholds affects treatment decisions and clinical outcomes for men and women.

 
6 Implementation
NICE will support this guidance through a range of activities to promote the
recommendations for further research. The research proposed will be considered by the
NICE Medical Technologies Evaluation Programme research facilitation team for
developing specific research study protocols as appropriate. NICE will also incorporate the
research recommendations in section 5 into its guidance research recommendations
database and highlight these recommendations to public research bodies.