KardiaMobile for detecting atrial fibrillation
1 Recommendations
1.1 KardiaMobile is recommended as an option for detecting atrial fibrillation (AF) for
people with suspected paroxysmal AF, who present with symptoms such as
palpitations and are referred for ambulatory electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring
by a clinician.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Detecting atrial fibrillation in people with suspected paroxysmal AF usually involves
wearing a continuous ECG monitor, such as a Holter monitor. KardiaMobile is a portable
ECG recorder that can help detect AF.
Clinical evidence shows that significantly more people had AF detected using the
KardiaMobile single-lead device compared with a Holter monitor.
Cost modelling shows that KardiaMobile is cost saving compared with Holter monitor by
an average of £13.22 per patient over 2 years in people presenting with symptoms such as
palpitations. KardiaMobile is cost saving because of a reduction in diagnostic costs
including the cost of the device. For more information on the cost impact to the NHS, see
the NICE resource impact summary report.

 
2 The technology
Technology
2.1 KardiaMobile is a portable electrocardiogram (ECG) recorder for detecting atrial
fibrillation (AF). It is available as a single-lead or 6-lead (KardiaMobile-6L) ECG
recorder. The single-lead device has 2 electrodes on the top surface. The person
places 2 fingers on each electrode to take their ECG. KardiaMobile-6L has
3 electrodes: 2 on the top surface and 1 on the bottom which is placed on the left
leg. People must keep still and must keep touching the electrodes for at least
30 seconds for a complete recording to be taken.
2.2 KardiaMobile works with a compatible smart mobile device to run the Kardia app.
While taking a reading, the ECG recording is sent wirelessly to the mobile device
where it can be viewed in the app. The app shows the ECG trace and the
classification as either normal, possible AF, tachycardia, bradycardia or
unclassified. Traces may also be classified as unreadable if the ECG data cannot
be interpreted because of possible interference. ECG data can be saved as a PDF
file and emailed to healthcare professionals.
Innovative aspects
2.3 KardiaMobile is easy to use. It is compact and can be used anywhere, at any time
of the day, to record an ECG. ECG recordings can be made available to healthcare
professionals as soon as they are taken rather than at the end of a specified
monitoring period.
Intended use
2.4 The KardiaMobile heart monitor and Kardia app is intended for adults to detect
abnormal heart rhythms. This guidance focuses on using KardiaMobile for
detecting AF in adults referred for ECG monitoring. KardiaMobile would be

 
prescribed by a healthcare professional for people who are experiencing
arrhythmia symptoms more than 24 hours apart. The healthcare professional will
advise on the frequency and length of use. The instructions for use state that all
interpretations of ECG recordings should be reviewed by a healthcare
professional and used to support clinical decision making.
Relevant pathway
2.5 The section on detection and diagnosis in NICE's guideline on atrial
fibrillation recommends that people with suspected AF have manual pulse
palpations to detect an irregular pulse. If an irregular pulse is then detected, a
12-lead ECG is done. If an irregular pulse is undetected by a 12-lead ECG
recording then an ambulatory monitor, event record or other ECG technology
should be done whether or not the person has symptoms.
Costs
2.6 The cost of a single-lead KardiaMobile device is £82.50 (excluding VAT) The
Kardia app is free of cost.
For more details, see the website for KardiaMobile.

 
3 Evidence
Clinical evidence
The main clinical evidence comprises 27 studies including
5 randomised controlled trials
3.1 There were 27 studies relevant to the decision problem in the scope:
• 5 randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
• 7 diagnostic accuracy studies
• 1 case-control study
• 13 single-arm observational studies
• 1 case report.
3.2 Of the 27 included studies, 16 studies were peer reviewed, including 4 UK studies
(Bray et al. 2021, Dimarco et al. 2018, Reed et al. 2021, Reed et al. 2019), one of
which is an RCT (Reed et al. 2019). The included studies covered 6 population
groups:
• people with palpitations
• people with a history of atrial fibrillation (AF), who have had treatment
(ablation, cardioversion, or medical therapy) to restore sinus rhythm and used
KardiaMobile to identify recurrence
• people with diagnosed AF to assess AF burden
• people with transient AF after surgery or hospitalisation whose heart rhythms
reverted back to sinus rhythm before discharge and used KardiaMobile to
identify recurrence
• people after stroke or transient ischaemic attack who were monitored using

 
KardiaMobile
• mixed population including people with known or suspected AF.
All published evidence is on the single-lead KardiaMobile device. For full
details of the clinical evidence, see section 4 of the assessment report in the
supporting documentation.
Evidence shows that monitoring with KardiaMobile increases AF
detection
3.3 Three RCTs including 1 UK trial (Goldenthal et al. 2019, Koh et al. 2021, Reed et al.
2019) found that significantly more people in the KardiaMobile monitored group
had AF detected compared with those who had standard care, which included
24-hour Holter monitoring. This was supported by the results from an
observational study (Yan et al. 2020).
Evidence suggests that the KardiaMobile algorithm has a high
diagnostic accuracy per electrocardiogram (ECG) recording
3.4 Four peer reviewed studies (Hermans et al. 2021, Lowres et al. 2016, Selder et al.
2019, William et al. 2018) reported on the diagnostic accuracy of AF detection
using the KardiaMobile algorithm compared with clinical interpretation of the
KardiaMobile ECG as the reference standard. Its sensitivity ranged between 92%
and 99% per recorded ECG, with specificity between 92% and 98%. However, the
external assessment centre (EAC) highlighted that diagnostic accuracy was
reported on a per ECG recording and not a per person basis. Also, these
4 studies had 4 different patient populations with a pre-test probability of AF
between 4.8% and 35.6%. The EAC also noted that KardiaMobile is not intended
to be used to confirm the presence of AF as a standalone test but to help detect
AF. All interpretations should be reviewed by healthcare professionals for clinical
decision making. It is expected that false positives and negatives are likely to be
captured by the clinical reviews.

 
Evidence shows that using KardiaMobile reduces time to AF
detection but there is no direct evidence for clinical outcomes
after AF diagnosis
3.5 Reed et al. (2019) showed that people using KardiaMobile had their symptomatic
cardiac arrhythmia detected significantly earlier than those having standard care
(9.9 days compared with 48.0 days, p=0.0004). This finding was supported by
1 observational study (Yan et al. 2020) which also reported that KardiaMobile
significantly reduced the time to AF detection when compared with standard
care. There was no direct published evidence to show that using KardiaMobile
improves clinical outcomes (such as reduction in stroke) after a diagnosis of AF.
KardiaMobile is easy to use and is associated with an
improvement in quality of life
3.6 The evidence from 12 studies and a patient survey reported that KardiaMobile
was easier to use compared with other ECG monitors such as Holter monitors.
People felt that KardiaMobile would be useful in self-monitoring at home and
improving their ability to access the care they needed. Two RCTs (Caceres et al.
2020, Guhl et al. 2020) showed that people who used KardiaMobile had a
significant improvement in AF-specific quality-of-life scores compared with
people in the control groups. The EAC noted that both trials used additional
interventions, and the effect of KardiaMobile alone on quality of life may be
difficult to interpret.
The rate of unclassified ECG outputs varied in the studies but is
falling because of software updates
3.7 Evidence reported that there were a proportion of ECG traces that did not fit the
current KardiaMobile algorithm classifications, ranging from 9.6% to 27.6%. These
outputs are presented as unclassified. However, the company stated that
software updates are improving the classification algorithm, and the number of
unclassified outputs is reducing. Also, around 0.6% to 1.9% of KardiaMobile
outputs were unreadable. This often happens when an ECG trace has

 
interference and cannot be interpreted by the Kardia app; however, a proportion
of these can be interpreted by a clinician.
Cost evidence
Published cost evidence includes 2 UK studies representing NHS
costs
3.8 Three published studies reported the economic impact of KardiaMobile:
• a cost-effectiveness analysis done alongside a UK RCT compared the cost
per symptomatic rhythm diagnosis using KardiaMobile in addition to standard
care with standard care alone (Reed et al. 2019)
• a UK budget impact analysis (York Health Economics Consortium et al. 2018)
• a US single-arm study estimated the cost saving using data from a patient
survey (Praus et al. 2021).
All studies reported that KardiaMobile was cost saving. Two studies reported
that the main driver for the saving was a reduction in healthcare
appointments.
The company presented a cost model showing that monitoring
with KardiaMobile is cost saving
3.9 The company developed a de novo model comparing KardiaMobile with Holter
monitoring and the Zio patch. The model included people aged 64 and over with
known or suspected AF who were referred for ambulatory ECG monitoring in a
secondary care setting. The model assessed the costs associated with
diagnosing and managing AF. Overall, the company's base case showed that
using KardiaMobile could save between £320 and £380 per person over 5 years
because of the cost of the technology, reductions in repeat testing, referrals to
secondary care and stroke events.

 
For full details of the cost evidence, see section 9 of the assessment report in the
supporting documentation.
The company's cost model was updated to address the limitations
presented by the EAC
3.10 The EAC was unable to validate the company's original model, and highlighted
limitations and errors in some of the parameters and assumptions used. The
complexity of the model meant that inconsistencies could not be investigated
and corrected. There was a lack of robust evidence to support the need for such
complex time dependencies in the diagnostic phase of the model, and this
approach required several additional assumptions. The EAC considered that the
diagnosis phase could have been modelled more simply. Overall, the EAC
considered the model to be overly complex, not transparent and not verifiable. It
also did not agree with underlying structural assumptions, parameter choice or
their implementation in the model.
3.11 The company submitted an updated cost model, which was modified and
simplified to address the EAC's comments. Furthermore, various scenario
analyses and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were done to explore uncertainties
of the cost impact. The model was informed by 6 comparative studies including
1 UK study (Reid et al. 2019) and the results showed that using KardiaMobile
resulted in cost saving in 2 studies of people with palpitations, and in 3 studies of
people who were monitored for recurrent AF but was cost incurring in a study for
monitoring AF. The EAC was, however, unable to validate the company model
without further clarifications from the company (see Appendix B - EAC
commentary), limiting the certainty in the results presented.
Additional cost modelling by the EAC showed KardiaMobile to be
cost saving for detecting AF in people presenting with
undiagnosed palpitations
3.12 The EAC initially did a simple cost calculator to explore the expected costs of
using KardiaMobile to detect and treat AF over a 1-year time horizon. It then went

 
on to develop a new cost model that better captured the clinical pathway of using
KardiaMobile for detection and ongoing monitoring of AF, compared with Holter
monitoring in the NHS. The additional analyses included people presenting with
undiagnosed palpitations and people who need to monitor AF recurrence after
treatment. The base case results of the additional analyses showed a saving of
£13.22 per person over 2 years when KardiaMobile was used for detecting AF in
people presenting with undiagnosed palpitations but an additional £85.91 cost
per patient over 10 years when KardiaMobile was used for monitoring AF
recurrence detection in a population at low risk of having a stroke
(CHA2DS2-VAScC score of 1).

 
4 Committee discussion
Clinical-effectiveness overview
Evidence supports using KardiaMobile for improved detection of
atrial fibrillation in people with suspected paroxysmal atrial
fibrillation
4.1 The committee noted considerable evidence from 6 comparative studies,
including 3 randomised controlled trials that showed improved atrial fibrillation
(AF) detection using the single-lead KardiaMobile. The clinical experts agreed
that monitoring with KardiaMobile could increase infrequent AF event detection
because it could record an AF event whenever symptoms are presented. The
external assessment centre (EAC) advised that the evidence base was strongest
in people with undiagnosed palpitations and people with a history of AF who
need to monitor their AF recurrence. The experts noted that, in clinical practice,
KardiaMobile has been most commonly used in people presenting with
palpitations for detecting infrequent AF events. The committee concluded that
the population groups in the evidence base reflected the use of the KardiaMobile
device in a wide range of relevant clinical contexts, but it considered the most
persuasive clinical cases were symptomatic people with suspected paroxysmal
AF.
KardiaMobile single-lead device is an option for detecting AF but
there is no evidence on the 6-lead device
4.2 The committee noted that all the evidence on the clinical effectiveness of
KardiaMobile was on the single-lead device. It was advised that the single-lead
device is commonly used in clinical practice to detect AF, and the use of the
6-lead device is limited in the NHS. The clinical experts agreed that the 6-lead
device provides heart rhythm from multiple angles, and it could have incremental
benefits in some people to detect other arrhythmias when a good quality

 
electrocardiogram (ECG) trace is available. For AF detection, the committee and
experts concluded that the single-lead device is suitable in most patients.
Evidence on using KardiaMobile for people after AF is diagnosed
would be valuable, including the clinical consequences
4.3 The clinical experts advised that AF is a chronic condition. After AF is diagnosed,
people are likely to be on medications such as anticoagulation or rhythm control
drugs to reduce the risk of stroke and control symptoms for a long time. The
experts noted that KardiaMobile could improve medication management; for
instance, some medications can only be used when the normal heart rhythm is
restored. However, no direct evidence was available on the clinical benefits of
KardiaMobile after diagnosis of AF. For example, there was no evidence for the
association between early AF detection and reduction in longer-term outcomes
such as stroke events. The committee understood the limitations of the evidence
base and concluded that more research would be of value that explores the use
of KardiaMobile after AF diagnosis, including the impact of using KardiaMobile on
clinical outcomes.
NHS considerations overview
KardiaMobile is easy to use and to access which means it is well
suited for ambulatory monitoring
4.4 Evidence from published studies and patient experts shows that KardiaMobile is
easier to use compared with other ECG monitors such as the Holter monitor.
People with experience of using KardiaMobile found the device to be accessible
at symptom onset and that it allowed improved access to care when needed. It
has been well accepted across people of different age groups if they have a
compatible mobile device. The committee concluded that KardiaMobile is a
convenient device that people can use at home to monitor their heart rhythms.
Patient selection will improve the care pathway and should be

 
guided by clinical judgement
4.5 Patient selection is important and should be guided by clinical judgement. The
clinical experts emphasised that devices need to be offered to people on an
individual basis guided by clinical assessment of individual circumstances. Key
factors to consider include risk of developing AF, age, comorbidities, and the
availability of primary and secondary care resources to interpret ECG traces.
Furthermore, other factors such as the compatibility of mobile devices and
patient preference also need to be considered. They noted that widespread use
of KardiaMobile in the NHS without careful patient selection may place extra
demand on local services. The committee concluded that healthcare
professionals should assess individuals and indications when considering
whether to prescribe KardiaMobile.
KardiaMobile outputs should be reviewed by a healthcare
professional for clinical decision making
4.6 The committee noted that one of KardiaMobile's advantages over some other
technologies is that it is a portable device that provides real-time ECG traces and
heart rhythm classification. Despite this, the EAC confirmed that clinical
interpretation of all recorded ECGs is needed, in line with the device instructions
for use, to limit the effect of false negative and false positive results. The clinical
experts added that expertise in interpreting ECG traces is essential to ensure the
accuracy of AF diagnosis. Also, the experts added that a considerable proportion
of unreadable and unclassified ECG recordings would be interpretable by
experienced healthcare professionals to inform clinical decision making. The
committee concluded that ECG data generated by KardiaMobile should be
reviewed by an experienced healthcare professional before a diagnosis is made.
People need a smart device compatible with the KardiaMobile app
and must stay still while taking an ECG recording
4.7 People need a smart device compatible with the KardiaMobile app. The company
provides a list of compatible smart devices. The clinical experts said that in their
experience, most people have access to a smart device, and alternative

 
ambulatory monitors are offered if a person does not have a compatible device.
The clinical experts also noted that KardiaMobile may not be suitable for people
who cannot stay still or have problems holding the device; for example, people
with tremors may have difficulty with recording an accurate trace.
Training is important to minimise unreadable ECG recordings
when using KardiaMobile
4.8 The clinical experts highlighted the issue of unreadable ECG traces. They
explained that the way people use the device is likely to affect the quality of ECG
recordings. In clinical practice, healthcare professionals often provide support for
people to set up the device, allowing them to also advise on effective use. There
are also self-help videos that explain how to use the device. The clinical experts
noted that a lack of experience using the device may lead to unreadable ECG
recordings. The committee concluded that training is important to make sure
people use the device correctly and minimise possible interference while taking
the recording.
Cost-modelling overview
The company's cost model estimated KardiaMobile to be cost
saving compared with other ECG monitors
4.9 The committee understood that the company's original cost model was complex.
The model was simplified during consultation. Data from 6 comparative studies
was used to estimate the cost impact using KardiaMobile for 2 separate cohorts:
1) undiagnosed people presenting with palpitations and 2) people with previously
diagnosed AF at risk of AF recurrence. The committee noted that the results from
the company's cost model showed that KardiaMobile is cost saving for each
cohort compared with Holter monitor over a 5-year time horizon. The committee
considered that some assumptions and parameters, such as 100% diagnostic
accuracy for KardiaMobile, may be unlikely or may not fully reflect clinical
practice. The committee concluded that the company's modified model was
relevant to the decision problem, but still featured limitations, and considered the

 
EAC's additional cost modelling a more appropriate basis for its decision making.
The EAC's additional cost modelling suggests that KardiaMobile is
likely to be cost saving in people with suspected AF presenting
with palpitations
4.10 The committee felt that the EAC's original approach using a cost calculator did
not capture the cost impact of using KardiaMobile. The EAC was therefore asked
to develop a new cost model, to evaluate using KardiaMobile to detect AF in
people presenting with undiagnosed palpitations and people being monitored for
AF recurrence. From these further analyses, the committee accepted that
KardiaMobile is slightly cost saving compared with standard care for patients with
undiagnosed AF (people with symptomatic palpitations). This saving is driven by
a reduction in diagnostic costs because the cost of KardiaMobile is lower than
that of Holter monitor. The clinical experts explained that the benefits of
KardiaMobile in this population are likely to be realised because KardiaMobile is
better at detecting infrequent AF events compared with Holter monitor. The
committee concluded that there are likely to be cost benefits using KardiaMobile
in symptomatic patients with suspected paroxysmal AF.
The care pathway for monitoring AF recurrence is complex and
varied and more information is needed
4.11 For people who need to monitor AF recurrence, including those who have had an
ischaemic stroke or a transient ischaemic attack without current evidence of AF,
the results of the EAC's analysis show that KardiaMobile is likely to be cost
incurring. This was driven by an increase in using anticoagulation for preventing
strokes. The committee understood that the model included only a small
selection of patients who are at low risk of developing strokes (CHA2DS2-VAScC
score of 1) and that medication was the only intervention included in the model.
Expert advice suggested that clinical management of patients being monitored
for AF recurrence is complex and varied widely because of patients'
comorbidities and their medical and treatment history. In clinical practice, there is
no clear care pathway for monitoring AF recurrence. The committee accepted the

 
limitations of the current model and concluded that more information is needed
about the care pathway for AF recurrence monitoring and its associated resource
use.