Percutaneous insertion of a temporary heart pump for left ventricular haemodynamic
support in high-risk percutaneous coronary interventions
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Current evidence on the safety of percutaneous insertion of a temporary
heart pump for left ventricular haemodynamic support in high-risk
percutaneous coronary interventions shows there are serious, infrequent
but well-recognised safety concerns. Evidence on efficacy is limited in
quality. Therefore, this procedure should only be used with special
arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or research.
Find out what special arrangements mean on the NICE interventional
procedures guidance page.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to do percutaneous insertion of a temporary heart
pump for left ventricular haemodynamic support in high-risk
percutaneous coronary interventions should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their NHS trusts.
• Ensure that patients understand the uncertainty about the procedure's safety
and efficacy and provide them with clear written information to support shared
decision-making. In addition, the use of NICE's information for the public on
percutaneous insertion of a temporary heart pump for left ventricular
haemodynamic support is recommended.
• Details of all patients should be entered into the British Cardiovascular
Intervention Society percutaneous coronary interventions database (BCIS PCI
database).
1.3 Patient selection should be done by an experienced multidisciplinary
team, when the urgency of the clinical situation allows.
1.4 The procedure should only be done in specialised centres by clinicians
and teams with specialised training in the use of this technology and
experience in complex percutaneous coronary interventions.
1.5 Further research should report details of patient selection and
subsequent management.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Additional support for the heart is not usually needed with angioplasty or
percutaneous coronary intervention. However, a subset of high-risk
patients may benefit from some form of heart support during their
angioplasty procedure. This includes those with extensive or complex
coronary artery disease (unprotected left main disease, last remaining
vessel or multi-vessel disease), poor left ventricular function, ongoing
myocardial ischemia, cardiogenic shock and comorbidity, in whom
revascularisation may not otherwise be possible.
Current treatments
2.2 Temporary percutaneous mechanical haemodynamic support can be
used prophylactically in some elective high-risk angioplasty procedures
or in urgent procedures. The aim is to support the patient's circulatory
system, provide blood flow to increase cardiac output, unload the
ventricle and improve blood flow to maintain haemodynamic stability.
This minimises myocardial ischemia and reduces the risk of
haemodynamic collapse during the procedure. Intra-aortic balloon
pumps or extra-corporeal pumps may be used for temporary
percutaneous mechanical haemodynamic support. Percutaneous left
ventricular-assist devices for haemodynamic support are sometimes
used instead of intra-aortic balloon pumps or extra-corporeal pumps.
The procedure
2.3 Inserting a temporary percutaneous mechanical haemodynamic support
device may be done before or during percutaneous coronary intervention
in selected high-risk patients, and is then taken out when the patient is
stable.
2.4 The procedure is done under local anaesthesia. An introducer sheath is
inserted into a large artery (usually the femoral or axillary artery) and a
guidewire is passed into the left ventricle. A catheter with an integrated
pump at its distal end is passed over the guidewire, into the large vessel
and into the left ventricle. Fluoroscopic imaging is used during the
procedure. The catheter is then attached to an automated external
console, which controls the pump speed and monitors its function,
allowing blood to be taken from the left ventricle and pumped into the
ascending aorta.
2.5 Different miniature, catheter-based, intravascular devices are available
and the precise implantation technique varies according to the device.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 10 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 4 systematic reviews, 3 case series, 1 randomised controlled
trial and 2 case reports, and is presented in table 2 of the interventional
procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in appendix A of the
overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: procedural success and completeness of
revascularisation, haemodynamic stability, survival to hospital discharge,
survival at 30 days, and rate of major adverse cardiac events.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: vascular damage, bleeding, haemolysis and left ventricle
damage.
3.4 Four commentaries from patients who had experience of this procedure
were received, which were discussed by the committee.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee noted that:
• Evidence of benefit for patients with cardiogenic shock is limited. In the
evidence reviewed, there were only a small number of patients with
cardiogenic shock who could not have percutaneous coronary intervention and
the outcomes of these patients are poor.
• The use of the procedure may allow intervention in patients who would
otherwise be unable to have percutaneous coronary intervention. This may
include patients who have had previous coronary artery surgery.
• The risks of bleeding has reduced with improvement in the design of the
technology.
• More than 1 device is available for use in this procedure and the technology is
evolving.