Percutaneous thrombectomy for intermediate-risk or high-risk pulmonary embolism
1 Recommendations
High-risk pulmonary embolism (PE) when
alternative treatments are not suitable
1.1 For high-risk PE in people who cannot have thrombolysis, or when there are no
other suitable treatment options or alternative treatments have failed,
percutaneous thrombectomy should only be used with special arrangements for
clinical governance, informed consent and audit. Find out what special
arrangements mean on the NICE interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 Clinicians wanting to do percutaneous thrombectomy for high-risk PE when
alternative treatments are not suitable should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their healthcare organisation.
• Ensure that people (and their families and carers as appropriate) understand
the procedure's safety and efficacy, and any uncertainties about these.
• Take account of NICE's advice on shared decision making, including NICE's
information for the public.
• Audit and review clinical outcomes of everyone having the procedure. The
main efficacy and safety outcomes identified in this guidance can be entered
into NICE's interventional procedure outcomes audit tool (for use at local
discretion).
• Discuss the outcomes of the procedure during their annual appraisal to

 
reflect, learn and improve.
1.3 Healthcare organisations should:
• Ensure systems are in place that support clinicians to collect and report data
on outcomes and safety for everyone having this procedure.
• Regularly review data on outcomes and safety for this procedure.
Intermediate-risk PE or high-risk PE when
alternative treatments are suitable
1.4 For intermediate-risk PE or high-risk PE when alternative treatments are suitable,
pulmonary thrombectomy should only be used in research. Find out what only in
research means on the NICE interventional procedures guidance page.
1.5 Further research should be in the form of randomised controlled trials or
registries. It should report:
• patient selection
• size and position of the clot
• degree of right ventricular dysfunction
• details of the procedure, including the device used
• short- and long-term outcomes, including patient-reported outcomes.
Why the committee made these recommendations
There is enough evidence that the procedure reduces the extent of clot in the circulation
but not enough evidence of improvement in short- and long-term outcomes. The evidence
on safety does not raise any major concerns. Most of the evidence is for intermediate-risk
PE. There is no evidence from randomised controlled trials and very little long-term follow-
up evidence, particularly for patient-reported outcomes.

 
There is an unmet need for people with high-risk PE when alternative treatments are not
suitable or have failed, and this procedure is the only treatment option. So, this procedure
is recommended for use with special arrangements for this population.
Because of the lack of evidence, this procedure is only recommended for use in research
for intermediate-risk PE, or high-risk PE when alternative treatments are suitable.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 A pulmonary embolism (PE) is when a pulmonary artery is obstructed by an
embolus (usually a blood clot) that travels to the lungs from deep veins in the leg
or pelvis. PE often causes shortness of breath, chest pain and cough. The
symptoms and severity vary from no symptoms to cardiovascular collapse and
death.
2.2 A high-risk PE (also known as massive PE) is defined by sustained systemic
hypotension or shock. An intermediate-risk PE (also known as submassive PE)
involves right ventricular dysfunction or myocardial injury without major
haemodynamic compromise. High-risk PE accounts for less than 10% of acute PE
cases and is a medical emergency with a high mortality rate.
Current treatments
2.3 The first-line treatment for PE is systemic or oral anticoagulants. For high- or
intermediate-risk PE with haemodynamic compromise, systemic thrombolysis
may be used or, rarely, open surgical embolectomy. Catheter-directed therapies
may also be used, including catheter-directed thrombolysis and percutaneous
thrombectomy. Catheter-directed therapies are usually used if someone has a
high-risk PE and they cannot have surgery, or when systemic thrombolysis is
contraindicated or has failed.

 
The procedure
2.4 In this endovascular procedure, a catheter is inserted percutaneously into the
peripheral vasculature (usually by a common femoral vein) and advanced through
the right side of the heart into the pulmonary arteries under image guidance. This
procedure is usually done by interventional radiologists and interventional
cardiologists. It is usually done using local anaesthesia with or without sedation.
2.5 There are several thrombectomy devices available with some variation in their
mechanism of action. The thrombus may be fragmented before removal or not.
There are several methods by which the thrombus can be removed: vacuum
suction, aspiration with a syringe, mechanical removal with a clot removal device,
or a combination of methods. It is a minimally invasive procedure that may be
used alone or in combination with other treatment options for PE.
2.6 The aim of the procedure is to rapidly remove the obstruction and restore
pulmonary circulation, reducing right ventricular strain, while avoiding the
bleeding risks associated with thrombolysis.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 12 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included 2 meta-analyses, 3 single-arm trials (1 trial included with
its sub-study), 1 safety database review, 1 prospective non-randomised
comparative study, 2 retrospective comparative studies, 1 prospective registry, 1
sub-set of the prospective registry and 1 case report. The evidence is presented
in the summary of key evidence section in the interventional procedures
overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: clot removal, recovery of cardiac function, 30-day mortality or

 
survival, symptomatic relief, long-term patient-reported outcome measures, and
quality of life.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: pain, bleeding, damage to vessels and the heart, and worsening cardiac
function.
3.4 One commentary from a person who had this procedure was received as part of
consultation comments and was discussed by the committee. A submission from
a patient organisation representing people who have had this procedure was also
discussed.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee noted that more than 1 device is available for this procedure.
Devices vary in the size of the introducer and their mechanism and are at
different stages of development.
3.6 The committee noted that this is a complex procedure and requires a
multidisciplinary team including clinicians with specific experience in managing
pulmonary embolism.