Peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis and management
Overview
This guideline covers diagnosing and managing peripheral arterial disease (PAD) in adults.
Rapid changes in diagnostic methods, endovascular treatments and vascular services
associated with new specialties in surgery and interventional radiology have resulted in
considerable uncertainty and variation in practice. This guideline aims to resolve that
uncertainty and variation.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners and providers
• Adults, and their families and carers

 
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 Information requirements
1.1.1 Offer all people with peripheral arterial disease oral and written information about
their condition. Discuss it with them so they can share decision-making, and
understand the course of the disease and what they can do to help prevent
disease progression. Information should include:
• the causes of their symptoms and the severity of their disease
• the risks of limb loss and/or cardiovascular events associated with peripheral
arterial disease
• the key modifiable risk factors, such as smoking, control of diabetes,
hyperlipidaemia, diet, body weight and exercise
• how to manage pain
• all relevant treatment options, including the risks and benefits of each
• how they can access support for dealing with depression and anxiety.
Ensure that information, tailored to the individual needs of the person, is
available at diagnosis and subsequently as required, to allow people to make
decisions throughout the course of their treatment. [2012]

 
1.1.2 NICE has produced guidance on the components of good patient experience in
adult NHS services. Follow the recommendations in NICE's guideline on patient
experience in adult NHS services. [2012]
1.2 Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease
in people with peripheral arterial disease
1.2.1 Offer all people with peripheral arterial disease information, advice, support and
treatment regarding the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease, in line
with published NICE guidance on:
• treating tobacco dependence
• diet, weight management and exercise
• lipid modification and statin therapy
• diabetes
• high blood pressure
• antiplatelet therapy. [2012]
1.2.2 Rivaroxaban plus aspirin is recommended as an option in NICE technology
appraisal guidance for preventing atherothrombotic events in people with
symptomatic peripheral arterial disease at high risk of ischaemic events. For full
details, see the guidance on rivaroxaban (TA607, 2019).
1.2.3 Clopidogrel is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance
for preventing occlusive vascular events in people with peripheral arterial
disease. For full details, see the guidance on clopidogrel (TA210, 2010).
1.3 Diagnosis
1.3.1 Assess people for the presence of peripheral arterial disease if they:

 
• have symptoms suggestive of peripheral arterial disease or
• have diabetes, non-healing wounds on the legs or feet, or unexplained leg
pain or
• are being considered for interventions to the leg or foot or
• need to use compression hosiery. [2012]
1.3.2 Assess people with suspected peripheral arterial disease by:
• asking about the presence and severity of possible symptoms of intermittent
claudication and critical limb ischaemia
• examining the legs and feet for evidence of critical limb ischaemia, for
example ulceration
• examining the femoral, popliteal and foot pulses
• measuring the ankle brachial pressure index (see recommendation 1.3.3).
[2012]
1.3.3 Measure the ankle brachial pressure index in the following way:
• The person should be resting and supine if possible.
• Record systolic blood pressure with an appropriately sized cuff in both arms
and in the posterior tibial, dorsalis pedis and, where possible, peroneal
arteries.
• Take measurements manually using a doppler probe of suitable frequency in
preference to an automated system.
• Document the nature of the doppler ultrasound signals in the foot arteries.
• Calculate the index in each leg by dividing the highest ankle pressure by the
highest arm pressure. [2012]

 
Diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes
1.3.4 Do not exclude a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes
based on a normal or raised ankle brachial pressure index alone. [2018]
1.3.5 Do not use pulse oximetry for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in people
with diabetes. [2018]
For a short explanation of why the committee made these 2018 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnosis.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
determining diagnosis and severity of peripheral arterial disease in people with
diabetes.
1.4 Imaging for revascularisation
1.4.1 Offer duplex ultrasound as first-line imaging to all people with peripheral arterial
disease for whom revascularisation is being considered. [2012]
1.4.2 Offer contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography to people with
peripheral arterial disease who need further imaging (after duplex ultrasound)
before considering revascularisation. [2012]
1.4.3 Offer computed tomography angiography to people with peripheral arterial
disease who need further imaging (after duplex ultrasound) if contrast-enhanced
magnetic resonance angiography is contraindicated or not tolerated. [2012]
1.5 Management of intermittent claudication
Supervised exercise programme
1.5.1 Offer a supervised exercise programme to all people with intermittent
claudication. [2012]

 
1.5.2 Consider providing a supervised exercise programme for people with intermittent
claudication which involves:
• 2 hours of supervised exercise a week for a 3-month period
• encouraging people to exercise to the point of maximal pain. [2012]
Angioplasty and stenting
1.5.3 Offer angioplasty for treating people with intermittent claudication only when:
• advice on the benefits of modifying risk factors has been reinforced (see the
section on secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in people with
peripheral arterial disease) and
• a supervised exercise programme has not led to a satisfactory improvement
in symptoms and
• imaging has confirmed that angioplasty is suitable for the person. [2012]
1.5.4 Do not offer primary stent placement for treating people with intermittent
claudication caused by aorto-iliac disease (except complete occlusion) or
femoro-popliteal disease. [2012]
1.5.5 Consider primary stent placement for treating people with intermittent
claudication caused by complete aorto-iliac occlusion (rather than stenosis).
[2012]
1.5.6 Use bare metal stents when stenting is used for treating people with intermittent
claudication. [2012]
Bypass surgery and graft types
1.5.7 Offer bypass surgery for treating people with severe lifestyle-limiting intermittent
claudication only when:
• angioplasty has been unsuccessful or is unsuitable and

 
• imaging has confirmed that bypass surgery is appropriate for the person.
[2012]
1.5.8 Use an autologous vein whenever possible for people with intermittent
claudication having infra-inguinal bypass surgery. [2012]
Pharmacological treatment
1.5.9 Consider naftidrofuryl oxalate for treating people with intermittent claudication,
starting with the least costly preparation, only when:
• supervised exercise has not led to satisfactory improvement and
• the person prefers not to be referred for consideration of angioplasty or
bypass surgery.
Review progress after 3 to 6 months and discontinue naftidrofuryl oxalate if
there has been no symptomatic benefit. [2012]
Naftidrofuryl oxalate is recommended as an option in NICE technology
appraisal guidance for treating intermittent claudication in people with
peripheral arterial disease for whom vasodilator therapy is considered
appropriate after taking into account other treatment options. For full details,
see the guidance on naftidrofuryl oxalate (TA223, 2011).
1.5.10 Cilostazol, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate are not recommended in NICE
technology appraisal guidance for treating intermittent claudication in people with
peripheral arterial disease. For full details, see the guidance on cilostazol,
pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate (TA223, 2011).
1.6 Management of critical limb ischaemia
1.6.1 Ensure that all people with critical limb ischaemia are assessed by a vascular
multidisciplinary team before treatment decisions are made. [2012]

 
Revascularisation
1.6.2 Offer angioplasty or bypass surgery for treating people with critical limb
ischaemia who require revascularisation, taking into account factors including:
• comorbidities
• pattern of disease
• availability of a vein
• patient preference. [2012]
1.6.3 Do not offer primary stent placement for treating people with critical limb
ischaemia caused by aorto-iliac disease (except complete occlusion) or
femoro-popliteal disease. [2012]
1.6.4 Consider primary stent placement for treating people with critical limb ischaemia
caused by complete aorto-iliac occlusion (rather than stenosis). [2012]
1.6.5 Use bare metal stents when stenting is used for treating people with critical limb
ischaemia. [2012]
1.6.6 Use an autologous vein whenever possible for people with critical limb ischaemia
having infra-inguinal bypass surgery. [2012]
Management of critical limb ischaemic pain
1.6.7 Offer paracetamol, and either weak or strong opioids depending on the severity
of pain, to people with critical limb ischaemic pain.
To support discussions with patients about the benefits and harms of opioid
treatment, and safe withdrawal management, see:
• NICE's guideline on medicines associated with dependence or withdrawal
symptoms
• NICE's guideline on shared decision making

 
• the section on medication review in NICE's guideline on medicines
optimisation. [2012, amended 2020]
1.6.8 Offer drugs such as laxatives and anti-emetics to manage the adverse effects of
strong opioids, in line with the person's needs and preferences. [2012]
1.6.9 Refer people with critical limb ischaemic pain to a specialist pain management
service if any of the following apply:
• their pain is not adequately controlled and revascularisation is inappropriate
or impossible
• ongoing high doses of opioids are required for pain control
• pain persists after revascularisation or amputation. [2012]
1.6.10 Do not offer chemical sympathectomy to people with critical limb ischaemic pain,
except in the context of a clinical trial. [2012]
Major amputation
1.6.11 Do not offer major amputation to people with critical limb ischaemia unless all
options for revascularisation have been considered by a vascular multidisciplinary
team. [2012]

 
Recommendations for research
In 2012 the guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
The committee's full set of research recommendations is detailed in the full guideline.
As part of the 2018 update, the standing committee made new research recommendations
on the effectiveness and reliability of tools for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in
people with diabetes. Details can be found in the evidence review.
Key recommendations for research
1 Effectiveness of tools for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease
in people with diabetes
What is the most clinically and cost-effective tool for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease
in people with diabetes?
Why this is important
People with diabetes are at higher risk of cardiovascular events and foot problems such as
diabetic neuropathy (nerve damage or degeneration), foot ulcer and limb loss. So it is
important to have an effective test for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in this group.
At present there are only studies of very low quality (retrospective and prospective
cross-sectional studies) containing small sample sizes. Diagnostic accuracy studies are
needed to address this issue, ideally containing cost–utility analysis, comparing diagnostic
tools with imaging. In order to explore the importance of early diagnosis, different clinical
settings where diagnostic tests are performed should be explored. [2018]
2 Effectiveness of tools for establishing the severity of peripheral
arterial disease in people with diabetes
What is the most clinically and cost-effective tool for establishing the severity of
peripheral arterial disease and the impact on mortality, morbidity and limb amputation in
people with diabetes?

 
Why this is important
Limited evidence suggests that doppler ankle brachial pressure index, toe brachial index
and oscillometric ankle brachial index accurately diagnose severity of peripheral arterial
disease. However, further research is needed using a robust diagnostic study design (such
as a randomised controlled trial) to explore the clinical and cost effectiveness of tools in
establishing the severity of disease and outcomes in people with diabetes. Studies should
also explore the use of tools in different populations, such as those with neuropathy, and
in different settings, for example, nursing homes, where access to services and diagnostic
equipment may differ. [2018]
3 Inter- and intra-rater reliability of assessment tools in the
diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes
What is the inter- and intra-rater reliability of assessment tools in the diagnosis of
peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes?
Why this is important
Identifying peripheral arterial disease can be a challenge because diagnostic tests are
conducted in a number of different settings by healthcare professionals with varying
experience of using assessment tools. Data on inter- and intra-rater reliability of
point-of-care assessment tools are needed to inform future recommendations for practice.
The study should compare diagnostic tests with gold standard imaging. Different clinical
and community settings, such as UK primary care setting, should also be taken into
account. [2018]
4 Angioplasty versus bypass surgery for treating people with
critical limb ischaemia caused by disease of the infra-geniculate
arteries
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of a 'bypass surgery first' strategy compared
with an 'angioplasty first' strategy for treating people with critical limb ischaemia caused
by disease of the infra-geniculate (below the knee) arteries?

 
Why this is important
Many people with critical limb ischaemia, especially those with diabetic vascular disease,
also have disease of the infra-geniculate (below the knee) arteries in the calf. For many
years, the standard of care has been bypass surgery. Although such surgery may be
associated with significant morbidity, the resulting long-term amputation-free survival
rates are generally good. In recent years there has been a trend towards treating
infra-geniculate disease with angioplasty, on the grounds that it is associated with less
morbidity than surgery. However, this change in practice is not evidence-based, and
serious concerns remain about the durability of angioplasty in this anatomical area. A
multicentre, randomised controlled trial with a full health economic analysis is required to
address this. The primary endpoint should be amputation-free survival, with secondary
endpoints including overall survival, health-related quality of life, healing of tissue loss, and
relief of ischaemic pain. [2012]
5 Supervised exercise programmes for treating people with
intermittent claudication
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of supervised exercise programmes compared
with unsupervised exercise for treating people with intermittent claudication, taking into
account the effects on long-term outcomes and continuing levels of exercise?
Why this is important
Research has shown that taking part in exercise and physical activity can lead to
improvements in symptoms in the short term for people with intermittent claudication.
However, the benefits of exercise are quickly lost if it is not frequent and regular.
Supervised exercise programmes have been shown to produce superior results when
compared with advice to exercise (unsupervised) in the short term, but they are more
expensive, and there is a lack of robust evidence on long-term effectiveness. A
community-based randomised controlled trial is required to compare the long-term clinical
and cost effectiveness of a supervised exercise programme and unsupervised exercise.
The trial should enrol people with peripheral arterial disease-related claudication, but
exclude those with previous endovascular or surgical interventions. The primary outcome
measure should be maximal walking distance, with secondary outcome measures
including quality of life, function, levels of uptake of exercise programmes and long-term
engagement in physical activity. [2012]

 
Other recommendations for research
6 Patient attitudes and beliefs about peripheral arterial disease
What is the effect of people's attitudes and beliefs about their peripheral arterial disease
on the management and outcome of their condition?
Why this is important
The evidence reviewed suggested that, among people with peripheral arterial disease,
there is a lack of understanding of the causes of the disease, a lack of belief that lifestyle
interventions will have a positive impact on disease outcomes, and unrealistic expectations
of the outcome of surgical interventions. Much of the research has been conducted on the
subpopulation of people with peripheral arterial disease who have been referred for
surgical intervention, but little evidence is available for the majority of people diagnosed
with peripheral arterial disease in a primary care setting. Research is needed to further
investigate attitudes and beliefs in relation to peripheral arterial disease, interventions that
might influence these and how these may have an impact on behavioural changes in
relation to risk factors for peripheral arterial disease, attitudes to intervention and clinical
outcomes. [2012]
7 Primary versus secondary stenting for treating people with
critical limb ischaemia caused by disease of the infra-geniculate
arteries
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of selective stent placement compared with
angioplasty plus primary stent placement for treating people with critical limb ischaemia
caused by disease of the infra-geniculate arteries?
Why this is important
Studies comparing angioplasty plus selective stent placement with primary stent
placement have been limited to the aorto-iliac and femoro-popliteal segment. There is also
a significant group of people with critical ischaemia caused by disease of the
infra-geniculate vessels in which there is a potential for endovascular treatment.
Infra-geniculate disease is more complex to treat by endovascular means, and the risks
and benefits of different treatment options may differ from those for the more proximal

 
vessels. A multicentre, randomised controlled trial with a full health economic analysis is
required to address the optimum policy as regards the choice of method for angioplasty
and stent placement for the infra-geniculate arteries. The primary endpoint should be
amputation-free survival, with secondary endpoints including overall survival,
re-intervention rates, health-related quality of life, healing of tissue loss, and relief of
ischaemic pain. [2012]
8 Chemical sympathectomy for managing critical limb ischaemic
pain
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of chemical sympathectomy in comparison with
other methods of pain control for managing critical limb ischaemic pain?
Why this is important
Approximately 1 in 5 people with critical limb ischaemia cannot be offered procedures to
improve the blood supply to their leg because of either the pattern of their disease or
other comorbidities. In this group the therapeutic options are pain control or primary
amputation. Chemical lumbar sympathectomy, which involves the destruction of the
lumbar sympathetic chain (usually the L2 and L3 ganglia), has been suggested to reduce
pain and improve wound healing, and may prevent amputation in some patients. Initially
achieved surgically, it is now most commonly performed using chemical agents such as
phenol to destroy the lumbar sympathetic chain. Despite having been used for over
60 years, the role of chemical lumbar sympathectomy remains unclear. Improvement in
skin blood flow and modification of pain perception control have been demonstrated, and
this has prompted the use of chemical lumbar sympathectomy for treating a range of
conditions such as regional pain syndrome, vasospastic conditions and critical limb
ischaemia. However, in critical limb ischaemia the use of chemical lumbar sympathectomy
varies widely between units in England, the mode of action and indications are unclear,
and there is currently no randomised controlled trial evidence demonstrating its clinical
value. Therefore a randomised control trial comparing chemical lumbar sympathectomy
with other methods of pain relief is recommended. [2012]

 
Rationale and impact
Diagnosis
Recommendations 1.3.4 and 1.3.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence showed that doppler ankle brachial pressure index below an agreed cut-off
increased the probability of diagnosing peripheral arterial disease. However, people with
diabetes and peripheral arterial disease may have a normal or raised index because of
hardening of the arteries. The committee agreed that it was important to highlight this so
that healthcare professionals do not exclude peripheral arterial disease in people with
diabetes based on a normal or raised ankle brachial pressure index alone.
There was a lack of evidence on the use of pulse oximetry for diagnosing peripheral
arterial disease in people with diabetes. The committee noted that a universal cut-off point
had not been established. This could lead to variation in the interpretation of results. It was
also noted that pulse oximetry is rarely used in clinical practice for assessing peripheral
arterial disease and there was general clinical agreement that it is not a useful test in this
context. Therefore, the committee recommended against the use of pulse oximetry for this
purpose.
There was not enough evidence on the use of other tests (doppler waveform analysis and
toe brachial index) for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in people with diabetes.
However, the committee agreed it was not appropriate to make recommendations against
the use of these tests, as there were good theoretical arguments as to why these tests
might provide useful diagnostic value. The committee therefore agreed to make
recommendations for research to inform future practice and any further update of this
guidance.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
determining the diagnosis and severity of peripheral arterial disease in people with
diabetes.
Full details of the evidence and committee discussion for the original (2012) guideline are

 
in the full guideline.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The new recommendations should improve the holistic assessment of peripheral arterial
disease in people with diabetes. This is important because this group has a higher risk of
cardiovascular events and foot problems such as diabetic neuropathy, foot ulcer and limb
loss. The recommendation clarifies the use of ankle brachial pressure index and highlights
the importance of interpreting pulse measurements in relation to clinical context, including
symptoms.
Return to recommendations

 
Context
Lower limb peripheral arterial disease (or peripheral arterial disease for short) is a marker
for increased risk of cardiovascular events even when it is asymptomatic. The most
common initial symptom of peripheral arterial disease is leg pain while walking, known as
intermittent claudication. Critical limb ischaemia is a severe manifestation of peripheral
arterial disease, and is characterised by severely diminished circulation, ischaemic pain,
ulceration, tissue loss and/or gangrene.
The incidence of peripheral arterial disease increases with age. Population studies have
found that about 20% of people aged over 60 years have some degree of peripheral
arterial disease. Smoking is also an important risk factor, with people who smoke having a
greater risk than people who have never smoked. Incidence is also high in people with
coronary artery disease and in people with diabetes, meaning that early diagnosis and
management of peripheral arterial disease is important . In most people with intermittent
claudication the symptoms remain stable, but approximately 20% will develop increasingly
severe symptoms with the development of critical limb ischaemia.
Mild symptoms are generally managed in primary care, with referral to secondary care
when symptoms do not resolve or deteriorate. There are several treatment options for
people with intermittent claudication. These include advice to exercise, management of
cardiovascular risk factors (for example, with aspirin or statins) and vasoactive drug
treatment (for example, with naftidrofuryl oxalate).
People with severe symptoms that are inadequately controlled are often referred to
secondary care for assessment for endovascular treatment (such as angioplasty or
stenting), bypass surgery, pain management and/or amputation.
Rapid changes in diagnostic methods, endovascular treatments and vascular services,
associated with the emergence of new sub-specialties in surgery and interventional
radiology, has resulted in considerable uncertainty and variation in practice. This guideline
aims to resolve that uncertainty and variation.
In 2018 we reviewed the evidence on tests for diagnosing peripheral arterial disease in
people with diabetes and added new recommendations for this group.
