
1 Recommendations
1.1 There is not enough evidence to recommend using QAngio XA 3D quantitative
flow ratio (QAngio QFR) and CAAS vessel fractional flow reserve (CAAS vFFR)
during invasive coronary angiography to assess coronary stenosis in stable
angina. QAngio QFR's diagnostic accuracy is considered acceptable for assessing
coronary stenosis during invasive coronary angiography, but its clinical
effectiveness is uncertain. CAAS vFFR's diagnostic accuracy and clinical
effectiveness is uncertain. Further research is recommended in both diagnostic-
only catheter labs and interventional catheter labs.
1.2 Further research is recommended (see section 5) on:
• people's experiences of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR compared with the
reference standard of FFR or instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR)
• test failure rates of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR in clinical practice and how
these affect whether revascularisation is done
• the clinical benefit of using QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR
• the diagnostic accuracy of CAAS vFFR.
Why the committee made these recommendations
FFR or iFR can be used with invasive coronary angiography to assess coronary stenosis.
However, they can have unpleasant side effects and increase the risk of adverse events,
such as damage to the artery.
CAAS vFFR and QAngio QFR use X-ray images taken during an invasive coronary
angiography to construct a 3D image of the artery. This image is used to estimate the
effect of coronary stenosis on blood flow through the artery without the side effects and
risk of adverse events of FFR or iFR.
Published evidence shows that the diagnostic accuracy of QAngio QFR is similar to FFR,

but the diagnostic accuracy of CAAS vFFR is very uncertain. Whether QAngio QFR or
CAAS vFFR affect clinical outcomes and improve quality of life is also uncertain. Also, in
clinical practice the quality of the images varies depending on if they are done in a
diagnostic-only centre or one that offers interventional procedures. Poor image quality
might mean the tests fail.
The cost-effectiveness estimates for CAAS vFFR and QAngio QFR are uncertain but
suggest that they are more cost effective than invasive coronary angiography alone. The
estimates suggest that, compared with FFR and iFR, CAAS vFFR is less cost effective and
QAngio QFR is slightly cheaper but less clinically effective.
There are multiple tests in use that assess coronary stenosis and it is not clear what
clinical benefits QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR offer over these. Therefore, QAngio QFR and
CAAS vFFR are not recommended for use in the NHS, and further research is
recommended.

2 The diagnostic tests
Clinical need and practice
2.1 Angina is chest pain caused by insufficient blood supply to the heart (myocardial
ischaemia). Stable angina is brought on by physical activity or emotional stress
and goes away with rest. It is the key symptom of coronary artery disease, which
is one of the main causes of morbidity and mortality in economically developed
countries.
2.2 Options for managing stable angina include lifestyle advice, drug treatment and
revascularisation using percutaneous (stent placement during percutaneous
coronary intervention) or surgical techniques (such as coronary artery bypass
surgery). Choosing the appropriate management option relies on correctly
detecting and characterising coronary stenosis. Therefore, the diagnostic
pathway for stable angina:
• confirms a diagnosis of stable angina
• defines the severity of coronary stenosis, which provides prognostic
information and identifies people who are likely to benefit from myocardial
revascularisation, in addition to optimal medical therapy.
2.3 The NICE guideline on assessment and diagnosis of chest pain of recent onset
recommends diagnostic testing for people in whom stable angina cannot be
excluded by clinical assessment alone. It recommends offering 64-slice (or
above) CT coronary angiography as the first-line diagnostic test when:
• clinical assessment indicates typical or atypical angina or
• clinical assessment indicates non-anginal chest pain but 12-lead resting ECG
has been done and indicates ST-T changes or Q waves.
2.4 For people in whom 64-slice (or above) CT coronary angiography has shown
coronary artery disease of uncertain functional significance, or is non-diagnostic,
the guideline recommends offering non-invasive functional imaging for
myocardial ischaemia. This could be:

• myocardial perfusion scintigraphy with single-photon emission CT (MPS with
SPECT) or
• stress echocardiography or
• first-pass contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) perfusion or
• MR imaging for stress-induced wall motion abnormalities.
2.5 If the results of non-invasive functional imaging are inconclusive, invasive
coronary angiography is recommended. Invasive coronary angiography shows
whether the arteries are blocked or narrowed, and the degree of stenosis. It is
usually used as a third-line investigation for stable angina or during the initial
stages of percutaneous coronary intervention. However, it is difficult to
differentiate between functionally significant and non-significant (not
substantially affecting blood supply) coronary stenosis using visual assessment
of invasive coronary angiograms.
2.6 If it is necessary to more accurately understand the functional significance of a
stenosis, fractional flow reserve (FFR) or instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR)
measurements can be done during invasive coronary angiography. These invasive
techniques use a pressure wire with or without a vasodilator drug, such as
adenosine, and can only be done in interventional catheter laboratories.
2.7 QAngio XA 3D quantitative flow ratio (QAngio QFR) and CAAS vessel FFR (CAAS
vFFR) are analytical software that can be used during invasive coronary
angiography to assess the functional significance of coronary stenosis. By
avoiding unnecessary invasive measurement of FFR or iFR, these technologies
could help avoid the risks associated with passing the pressure wire to the
coronary arteries, and with adenosine infusion.
The interventions
2.8 Both tests included in the assessment are CE marked and available to the NHS.

CAAS vFFR
2.9 The CAAS vFFR software (Pie Medical Imaging) works by building a 3D
reconstruction of a coronary artery as well as assessing the pressure drop across
the stenosis and calculating a vFFR value. Therefore, it gives both anatomical and
functional assessments of the stenosis. It uses 2 standard X-ray angiograms, and
is compatible with most X-ray systems (that is, it is vendor independent). The
company claims that the total analysis time is about 2 minutes per coronary
artery. Thresholds for interpretation of vFFR are not provided in the instructions
for use document.
QAngio XA 3D QFR
2.10 The QAngio software (Medis Medical Imaging) uses X-ray angiographic images
taken during invasive coronary angiography. Two images are needed, which have
to be taken with at least 25 degrees difference in viewing angle and with a frame
speed of at least 12.5 frames per second. High image quality is crucial for
appropriate results. The QAngio software creates a 3D anatomical model of a
coronary artery from these 2 images, and then estimates QFR from the 3D vessel
anatomy and flow velocity. The company claims that the total analysis time is
about 4 to 5 minutes per coronary artery. The analysis time may decrease with
routine use of the software. The QFR represents an assessment of the pressure
drop over the artery, with a value of 1 representing a normally functioning artery
with no pressure drop. A 20% or more drop in blood pressure (QFR value of 0.80
or less) is usually considered a significant obstruction, where revascularisation
should be considered.
2.11 The QAngio software offers 2 different flow models to calculate QFR:
• fixed-flow QFR (fQFR), using fixed-flow velocity and
• contrast QFR (cQFR), using contrast frame count in an angiogram without
hyperaemia.
Fixed-flow QFR is faster to compute, but may be less accurate than contrast
QFR.

The comparator
2.12 The comparator is clinical decision making based on the visual interpretation of
the images from invasive coronary angiography, alongside clinical judgement.
The reference standard for assessing diagnostic accuracy is FFR or iFR.

3 Evidence
The diagnostics advisory committee considered evidence on QAngio XA 3D quantitative
flow ratio (QAngio QFR) and CAAS vessel fractional flow reserve (CAAS vFFR) for
assessing coronary stenosis during invasive coronary angiography from several sources.
Full details are in the project documents for this guidance.
Clinical effectiveness
3.1 The external assessment group (EAG) identified 41 unique studies that met the
selection criteria for inclusion in the review. Of the included studies, 39 evaluated
QAngio QFR, 3 evaluated CAAS vFFR and only 1 study directly compared QAngio
QFR with CAAS vFFR. There were 2 studies that did not report diagnostic
accuracy data but included other eligible outcomes. Seventeen of the studies
were conference abstracts only, 15 of which were included in the diagnostic
accuracy review.
3.2 Fifteen of the studies were done in multiple centres. Most studies were done in
Asia, including 33 with sites in Japan, 5 in China, 4 in South Korea and 1 site in
Singapore. A total of 22 studies had sites in Europe, 3 of which were in the UK.
Two of the studies had sites in the US and 2 separate single studies had sites in
Brazil and Australia.
3.3 Of the 22 QAngio QFR studies, 11 were at low risk of bias. The main source of bias
was related to patient selection. The EAG also noted concerns that a high number
of studies had been done retrospectively (offline use of QAngio QFR) rather than
as part of invasive coronary angiography and before FFR.
3.4 Of the CAAS vFFR studies, all did CAAS vFFR analyses retrospectively (offline),
and 2 were done at a single centre. Only the ILUMIEN I study had a full text
manuscript. This study was considered at high risk of selection bias because of
the large percentage of lesions excluded.

Diagnostic test accuracy
CAAS vFFR
3.5 Of the 4 studies reporting the diagnostic accuracy of CAAS vFFR only 1 (ILUMIEN
I) reported a 2 x 2 table of diagnostic accuracy, and only 1 presented a
Bland–Altman plot (FAST; Masdjedi et al. 2019) from which data were extracted to
calculate diagnostic accuracy. Two of the studies were conference abstracts and
only reported sensitivity and specificity without confidence intervals (Jin et al.
2019 and FAST EXTEND). One of these studies used an acquisition speed of
7.5 frames per second rather than the 12.5 frames per second recommended in
the instructions for use (Jin et al. 2019). There was notable heterogeneity across
this small number of studies. The FAST EXTEND study was used in the base-case
cost-effectiveness analysis. The ILUMIEN I and Jin et al. (2019) studies were not
included in the base-case cost-effectiveness analysis. Instead, they were
included in separate scenario analyses to test the sensitivity of the cost-
effectiveness results.
3.6 The EAG noted that the meta-analyses of the CAAS vFFR studies should be
interpreted with caution because imputation of data (replacing missing data with
substituted values) was needed. This was for 2 studies on the prevalence of FFR
results below and above the cut-off for revascularisation decisions (0.80 or less),
and because of the high heterogeneity across studies. The results of these
bivariate meta-analyses are summarised in table 1.
Table 1 Bivariate meta-analysis of CAAS vFFR studies
Analysis Sensitivity 95% confidence intervals Specificity 95% confidence intervals
Using FAST
75.98 66.86 to 83.22 74.38 51.32 to 88.89
(Masdjedi et al. 2019)
Using FAST EXTEND 84.86 61.76 to 95.11 72.20 50.30 to 86.95
3.7 Only 1 study, reported as a conference abstract, directly compared CAAS vFFR
with QAngio QFR. It concluded that diagnostic performance of CAAS vFFR was
poorer than for QAngio QFR, with area under the curves of 0.719 (95% confidence
interval [CI] 0.621 to 0.804) for CAAS vFFR and 0.886 (95% CI 0.807 to 0.940) for
contrast QFR (cQFR).

QAngio QFR
3.8 The EAG did a meta-analysis of the included studies, focusing on the diagnostic
accuracy of QAngio QFR to detect lesions or vessels needing intervention
(defined as having an FFR of 0.80 or less). Two approaches were used. The
primary analysis consisted of a meta-analysis of reported diagnostic accuracy
data. The secondary analysis used a data extraction approach in which FFR and
QAngio QFR values from published plots were extracted and used to calculate
diagnostic accuracy. This second approach allowed for a wider range of analyses.
3.9 The EAG identified 26 studies with sufficient diagnostic accuracy data to be
included in the primary meta-analysis. Both univariate and bivariate meta-
analyses of sensitivity and specificity were done and compared. These were
divided into 3 modes of QAngio QFR: fixed-flow QFR (fQFR), contrast QFR (cQFR)
and studies in which the type of QAngio QFR was not specified. Most studies
included in the primary analysis used FFR as the reference standard, using a cut-
off of 0.80, although 1 study used instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) as the
reference standard. The EAG noted that there was no conclusive evidence of a
significant difference between cQFR and fQFR.
3.10 In the univariate meta-analysis for the random-effect analysis, QAngio QFR at a
cut-off of 0.80 had good diagnostic accuracy to predict FFR (also at a cut-off of
0.80). cQFR had a sensitivity of 85% (95% CI 78% to 90%) and specificity of 91%
(95% CI 85% to 95%); fQFR had a sensitivity of 82% (95% CI 68% to 91%) and
specificity of 89% (95% CI 77% to 95%). Studies that did not specify the mode of
QAngio QFR had a sensitivity of 84% (95% CI 78% to 89%) and specificity of 89%
(95% CI 87% to 91%).
3.11 Summary positive predictive values were 77% (95% CI 69% to 83%) for fQFR, 85%
(95% CI 80% to 89%) for cQFR and 80% (95% CI 76% to 84%) for non-specified
QAngio QFR (see figure 27 in the appendix of the diagnostics assessment report).
Summary negative predictive values were 92% (95% CI 89% to 94%) for fQFR,
91% (95% CI 85% to 94%) for cQFR and 91% (95% CI 87% to 93%) for non-
specified QAngio QFR.
3.12 The results of the bivariate meta-analysis were almost identical to the univariate
analyses, with no conclusive evidence of a significant difference between fQFR
and cQFR. The results of this analysis are summarised in table 2.

Table 2 Results of bivariate meta-analysis
Mode Sensitivity 95% confidence intervals Specificity 95% confidence intervals
cQFR 84.32 77.29 to 89.48 91.4 84.96 to 95.24
fQFR 81.61 66.97 to 90.66 89.43 77.58 to 95.38
Non-specified QFR 84.25 78.51 to 88.68 88.95 87.02 to 90.61
cQFR or
84.34 80.04 to 87.85 89.80 86.36 to 92.45
non-specified QFR
Abbreviations: QFR, quantitative flow ratio; cQFR, contrast QFR; fQFR, fixed-flow QFR.
3.13 The mean difference between QAngio QFR and FFR was almost exactly zero for
all 3 modes of QAngio QFR testing. For fQFR the mean difference was 0 (95% CI
-0.05 to 0.06), for cQFR the mean difference was -0.01 (95% CI -0.06 to 0.04)
and for non-specified QAngio QFR the mean difference was 0.01 (95% CI -0.03 to
0.05). FFR and QAngio QFR were highly correlated in all studies, with correlation
coefficients of 0.78 (95% CI 0.72 to 0.82) for fQFR, 0.78 (95% CI 0.70 to 0.85) for
cQFR and 0.79 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.83) for non-specified QAngio QFR.
3.14 The secondary analysis allowed for a wider range of analyses, such as
considering different QAngio QFR and FFR cut-offs, and the effect of using a grey
zone, in which people with intermediate QAngio QFR values go on to have
confirmatory FFR.
3.15 A bivariate meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy using data extracted from
figures gave summary estimates for sensitivity and specificity of 84.6% (95% CI
80.7% to 87.8%) and 87.2% (95% CI 83.4% to 90.3%), respectively. This was
similar to the results from the primary analysis when cQFR and non-specified QFR
were combined.
3.16 QFR, as measured by QAngio, was highly correlated with FFR (r=0.80). In 50% of
people, QFR and FFR differed by no more than 0.04. In 95% of people, values
differed by no more than 0.14.

Grey-zone analysis
3.17 In the grey-zone analysis:
• If QAngio QFR is more than 0.84: continue without stenting or bypass and
defer FFR (test negative).
• If QAngio QFR is 0.78 or less: proceed directly to stenting or bypass without
FFR (test positive).
• If QAngio QFR is between 0.78 and 0.84: do an FFR and proceed based on
that result (at 0.80 cut-off).
3.18 This strategy increased diagnostic accuracy compared with using QAngio QFR
alone. The sensitivity was 93.1% (95% CI 90.1% to 94.9%) and the specificity was
92.1% (95% CI 88.3% to 94.5%). A total of 20.1% of people were in the grey zone
and would have confirmatory FFR. However, only 30.4% of people with QAngio
QFR results in the grey zone had results that differed from their FFR.
Invasive coronary angiography
3.19 The EAG identified 5 studies included in the meta-analysis that also reported 2 x
2 table data on the diagnostic accuracy of using 2D or 3D invasive coronary
angiography alone. These studies used 50% diameter stenosis as the cut-off and
FFR of 0.80 or less as the reference standard. Given the small number of studies,
and because 2D and 3D invasive coronary angiography may have very different
performance, no bivariate meta-analysis of these data was done. However, the
results of the individual studies showed that the diagnostic accuracy of invasive
coronary angiography was inferior to QAngio QFR.
3.20 To inform the economic analysis, the EAG did an additional pragmatic search for
studies that compared 2D invasive coronary angiography with FFR assessment.
Data extracted from these studies showed that compared with QAngio QFR, the
correlation of 2D invasive coronary angiography with FFR was much weaker
(correlation coefficient -0.432). A bivariate meta-analysis of these extracted data
produced summary sensitivity and specificity estimates of 62.6% (95% CI 51.5%
to 72.5%) and 61.6% (95% CI 53.1% to 69.4%), respectively.

Other intermediate outcomes
Test failure
3.21 The most reported (15 studies) causes of exclusion were issues with image
acquisition and quality (for example, lack of at least 2 projections with a
25 degree angle in between, or poor image quality). The second most reported
reason for exclusion was anatomical features of arteries (for example, excessive
overlapping or foreshortening, ostial lesions, severe tortuosity).
3.22 Exclusion rates for QAngio QFR were higher overall in retrospective studies
(median 28%, range 6% to 92%) compared with prospective studies (median 17%,
range 7% to 52%). This may be partly explained by the fact that invasive coronary
angiography images in retrospective studies were less likely to have been
collected following manufacturer instructions.
3.23 There were only 2 retrospective CAAS vFFR studies that reported exclusion rates,
and these were both high at 63% and 65%. In both studies most exclusions were
because of angiographic image processing issues such as lack of suitable
projections or poor image quality (rather than directly because of CAAS vFFR).
Variability
3.24 There were 8 studies that reported outcomes data on reproducibility of QAngio
QFR readings between 2 different analysts (inter-observer variability). QAngio
QFR was found to have a moderate to high level of inter-observer reliability. In
2 studies, CAAS vFFR was also found to have a high level of inter-observer
reliability.
3.25 There were 8 retrospective studies that reported outcomes data on intra-
observer reproducibility of QAngio QFR readings. The time gap between initial
and repeated measurements was reported in 4 studies and ranged from 3 days
to 2 weeks. Most studies reported a high level of intra-observer reliability for
QAngio QFR. One study evaluated both QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR and found
high levels of repeatability and no statistically significant changes between
repeated tests.

Timing
3.26 There were 6 studies of QAngio QFR that reported the time needed to complete
QFR analysis. Time to QFR data acquisition ranged from an average of 2 minutes
and 7 seconds to 10 minutes (standard deviation 3 minutes). One study of
268 patients reported that time to image acquisition significantly decreased with
the number of invasive coronary angiographies analysed, from 5 minutes and
59 seconds to 2 minutes and 7 seconds between the first and last 50 patients.
Morbidity, mortality and major adverse events
3.27 There were 3 cohort studies that reported mortality or major clinical outcomes in
eligible patients with QAngio QFR measurements. All found that a clinically
significant QAngio QFR predicted a higher incidence of long-term major
cardiovascular adverse events. No data were reported for CAAS vFFR.
Subsequent use of invasive pressure-wire FFR
3.28 Five studies included in the diagnostic accuracy review retrospectively derived a
grey-zone strategy based on their diagnostic accuracy results to model a
potential reduction in adenosine and FFR use. These results are summarised in
table 3.
Table 3 Adenosine and FFR procedures reduced: grey-zone strategy models from
included studies
Grey Diagnostic accuracy of grey-zone strategy (QFR Percentage of adenosine or
Study
zone compared with FFR) FFR procedures avoided
FAVOR II Europe- 0.77
Sensitivity and specificity more than
Japan Westra to 64%
95%
(2018) 0.86
Kanno (2019a; 0.73 Positive predictive value and
conference to negative predictive value more than 52%
abstract) 0.84 90%

Grey Diagnostic accuracy of grey-zone strategy (QFR Percentage of adenosine or
Study
zone compared with FFR) FFR procedures avoided
0.74
Mejia-Renteria
to More than 95% agreement 59%
(2019)
0.84
0.77
Smit (2019) to Sensitivity: 95%, specificity: 92.5% 61%
0.86
0.78
Sensitivity and specificity more than
WIFI II to 68%
90%
0.87
0.71
Sensitivity and specificity more than
WIFI II to 42%
95%
0.90
Abbreviations: FFR, fractional flow reserve; QFR, quantitative flow ratio.
Simulation study of clinical effectiveness
3.29 Because of the lack of published data on QAngio QFR's clinical effectiveness, the
EAG did a simulation study to investigate its possible effect on coronary
outcomes compared with FFR.
3.30 The sample population was taken from data extracted from published
Bland–Altman figures. Only cQFR or non-specified QAngio QFR data were used,
for 3,193 people, each with an FFR measurement and its associated QAngio QFR
measurement. To predict coronary outcomes, the results of the recent IRIS-FFR
registry report were used. This represented 5,846 people who either had
revascularisation (stent or bypass surgery) or continued with current
management without surgery based on their measured FFR result. The IRIS-FFR
study used major adverse cardiovascular events as its primary outcome.
3.31 Three strategies for deciding whether to revascularise were investigated:
• FFR only: do FFR for all and revascularise if FFR is 0.80 or less.
• QAngio QFR only: do QAngio QFR for all and revascularise if QAngio QFR is

0.80 or less, without measuring FFR.
• Grey zone: do QAngio QFR for all and:
－ revascularise if QAngio QFR is 0.78 or less
－ defer if QAngio QFR is more than 0.84
－ if QAngio QFR is between 0.78 and 0.84, do FFR and revascularise if FFR
is 0.80 or less.
3.32 If using the FFR only strategy 40.2% of people would have revascularisation.
Using the QAngio QFR only strategy 42.0% would have revascularisation, and
using the grey-zone strategy 43.2% would have revascularisation. Using QAngio
QFR therefore moderately increased the revascularisation rate, and using it with a
grey zone increased it further.
3.33 These simulations suggest that using FFR may prevent slightly more major
adverse cardiovascular events, at around 1 event per 1,000 people, but the
overlap in simulated distributions means it is highly uncertain whether the
difference is genuine. By contrast, the simulation suggests that QAngio QFR
increases the number of revascularisations done, without substantially improving
the number of major adverse cardiovascular events prevented. Overall these
simulations suggested that there was little conclusive clinical difference between
using QAngio QFR and FFR to make revascularisation decisions.
Cost effectiveness
Systematic review of cost-effectiveness evidence
3.34 The EAG did a search to identify studies investigating the cost effectiveness of
using QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR imaging software to assess the functional
significance of coronary stenosis during invasive coronary angiography. No
studies were found so a review of published cost-effectiveness studies
evaluating invasive coronary angiography (alone or with FFR) in managing
coronary artery disease was done. The EAG identified 21 relevant studies and of

these, 2 models (Walker et al. 2011 and Genders et al. 2015) were good examples
of alternative ways to evaluate diagnostic strategies in patients with suspected
stable angina.
3.35 For the economic analysis, the following 5 diagnostic strategies were considered:
• invasive coronary angiography alone (strategy 1)
• invasive coronary angiography followed by confirmatory FFR or
instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR; reference standard, strategy 2)
• invasive coronary angiography with QAngio QFR (strategy 3)
• invasive coronary angiography with QAngio QFR, followed by confirmatory
FFR or iFR if QFR is inconclusive (strategy 4)
• invasive coronary angiography with CAAS vFFR (strategy 5).
Economic model
3.36 The EAG developed a de novo economic model. It was designed to estimate the
cost effectiveness of using QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR during invasive coronary
angiography to assess the functional significance of coronary stenosis in people
with stable angina whose angiograms showed intermediate stenosis. The model
had 2 parts, a diagnostic model and a prognostic model. The diagnostic model
was used to link the diagnostic accuracy of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR to short-
term costs and consequences relating to decisions about revascularisation. The
prognostic model took the diagnostic outcomes and modelled the risk of longer-
term events, such as myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death and the need
for urgent or unplanned revascularisation.
3.37 The population consisted of people with stable coronary artery disease whose
invasive coronary angiograms showed intermediate stenosis. The age and sex
distribution of the population was derived from the IRIS-FFR registry (mean age
of 64 years and 72% men).

Model inputs
3.38 The prevalence of functionally significant stenosis in the population was based on
studies that reported values of FFR and cQFR or non-specified QFR. It was
assumed that the population in these QAngio QFR studies reflected the UK
population. This suggested a prior likelihood of functionally significant stenosis of
40.2%, based on the proportion of people in the studies who had an FFR
measurement of 0.80 or less.
3.39 The proportion of positive or negative test results when using the QAngio QFR,
CAAS vFFR or invasive coronary angiography (strategies 3, 5 and 1) was based
on the estimated accuracy of the 3 tests. The diagnostic accuracy estimates for
these 3 tests are shown in table 4.
Table 4 Diagnostic accuracy estimates for QAngio QFR, CAAS vFFR and invasive
coronary angiography
Test Strategy Analysis Sensitivity Specificity Source
QAngio Base Bivariate meta-analysis for combined cQFR
3 84.34% 89.80%
QFR case and non-specified QFR mode
QAngio
3 Scenario 84.32% 91.40% Bivariate meta-analysis for cQFR mode
QFR
QAngio
3 Scenario 81.61% 84.93% Bivariate meta-analysis for fQFR mode
QFR
CAAS Base
5 97.00% 74.00% FAST EXTEND (2019)
vFFR case
CAAS
5 Scenario 75.00% 46.50% ILUMIEN I (2019)
vFFR
CAAS
5 Scenario 68.20% 87.30% Jin et al. (2019)
vFFR
Base
ICA 1 62.61% 61.59% Bivariate meta-analysis of 6 studies
case
ICA 1 Scenario 71.00% 66.00% Danad et al. (2017) per vessel analysis
Abbreviations: ICA, invasive coronary angiography; QFR, quantitative flow ratio; cQFR,
contrast QFR; fQFR, fixed-flow QFR; vFFR, vessel fractional flow reserve.

3.40 The diagnostic accuracy of QAngio QFR in strategy 4 was based on the joint
distribution of QFR and FFR measurements in the extracted individual-level
patient data. The probabilities of QAngio QFR test results being positive (QFR less
than 0.78), negative (QFR more than 0.84) or inconclusive (QFR of 0.78 to 0.84)
are shown in table 5.
Table 5 QAngio QFR diagnostic accuracy estimates for strategy 4
QAngio QFR test Functionally significant stenosis Non-significant stenosis
Probability
result (FFR 0.80 or less) (FFR 0.80 or more)
Positive QFR less than 0.78 0.744 0.095
Inconclusive QFR 0.78 or more to
0.188 0.212
(grey zone) 0.84 or less
Negative QFR more than 0.84 0.069 0.693
Abbreviations: FFR, fractional flow reserve; QFR, quantitative flow ratio.
3.41 The rates of FFR and iFR procedural complications applied in the base-case
analysis are summarised in table 6.
Table 6 Rates of FFR and iFR procedural complications in the model
Serious procedural complication Rate Source
Coronary dissection 0.03% IRIS-FFR registry
Venous occlusion 0% IRIS-FFR registry
Ventricular arrhythmia 0.02% IRIS-FFR registry
Conduction disturbance needing treatment 0.03% IRIS-FFR registry
Bronchospasm 0.02% IRIS-FFR registry
Thrombus formation 0.01% IRIS-FFR registry
Death 0.015% Fearon et al. (2003)
3.42 The rate of procedural deaths associated with revascularisation was sourced
from UK audit data, which gives a 0.99% death risk for non-emergency coronary
artery bypass graft and 0.17% for percutaneous coronary intervention. The

mortality rate associated with revascularisation was estimated as a weighted
average of the mortality rates for percutaneous coronary intervention and
coronary artery bypass graft. This was relative to the proportion of percutaneous
coronary interventions and coronary artery bypass graft procedures. In the base
case, 87% of revascularisation procedures were assumed to be percutaneous
coronary intervention, and 13% were assumed to be coronary artery bypass graft.
3.43 The reported 1-year and long-term (up to 3 years) cumulative incidence of major
adverse cardiovascular events in the IRIS-FFR registry for deferred lesions was
used in the model to estimate the baseline risk of major adverse cardiovascular
events for the first year and subsequent years. The baseline risk of major adverse
cardiovascular events used in the model for people in the group with the highest
FFR values (0.91 or more) was 0.64% in the first year and 0.32% per year in
subsequent years. The hazard ratios were 1.06 (95% CI 0.99 to 1.13), 1.09 (95% CI
1.05 to 1.14), 1.07 (95% CI 1.06 to 1.09) per 0.01 decrease in FFR for cardiac death,
myocardial infarction, and unplanned or urgent revascularisation, respectively.
3.44 The treatment effect of revascularisation on major adverse cardiovascular events
in people with stable coronary artery disease is highly uncertain. The ISCHEMIA
trial, a randomised, parallel, open-label clinical trial comparing revascularisation
with optimal medical therapy, did not find evidence that revascularisation
reduced the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events. Therefore, in the base-
case analysis, the diagnostic tests did not benefit major adverse cardiovascular
events outcomes. Scenario analyses were done to explore the effect of this
assumption.
Health-related quality of life
3.45 By identifying the appropriateness for revascularisation, the tests can have health
benefits through greater symptom relief and, therefore, higher health-related
quality of life (HRQoL). Because the base-case analysis assumed that there was
no treatment effect of revascularisation on major adverse cardiovascular events,
the improvement in symptom relief was the only benefit. The HRQoL effects of
revascularisation were based on the FAME trials. Both were randomised, parallel,
open-label clinical trials. FAME I compared invasive coronary angiography with
FFR for guiding percutaneous coronary interventions in patients with multivessel

coronary artery disease. FAME II compared clinical outcomes, safety and cost
effectiveness of FFR-guided percutaneous coronary intervention with optimal
medical treatment alone in patients with stable coronary artery disease. These
trials showed that HRQoL improved significantly from baseline after percutaneous
coronary intervention.
3.46 In the diagnostic model a one-off procedural disutility was applied for people
having invasive FFR or iFR and for those who had revascularisation. In the
prognostic model, a one-off utility decrement was also applied for people who
had a non-fatal myocardial infarction or needed an unplanned revascularisation. A
separate utility decrement was applied to the post-myocardial infarction health
state, to reflect a decrease in HRQoL for those with a history of myocardial
infarction.
3.47 The base-case analysis made an assumption that the quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) loss applied for FFR or iFR was representative of both types of pressure
wire procedures. The QALY loss estimates associated with each procedure in the
diagnostic model are summarised in table 7.
Table 7 QALY loss associated with testing and revascularisation procedures
Mean QALY loss (95% confidence
Procedure Source
interval)
ICA 0 Assumed to cancel across strategies
FFR/ 0.0056 (0.0051 to Assumed the same as for PCI (in the absence of any
iFR 0.0062) other source)
0.0056 (0.0051 to
PCI Bagust et al. (2006)
0.0062)
CABG 0.033 (0.031 to 0.035) Bagust et al. (2006)
Abbreviations: ICA, invasive coronary angiography; FFR, fractional flow reserve; iFR,
instantaneous wave-free ratio; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; CABG, coronary
artery bypass graft; QALY, quality-adjusted life year.

Costs
3.48 The base-case cost of QAngio QFR with a throughput of 200 people per year was
£430.61 per person tested. This was based on the purchase of vouchers for
100 people, which covered the cost of the software licence and the training and
certification of up to 4 QAngio QFR users, in addition to a staff cost per person
tested of £7.76. An update to the QAngio QFR price structure was submitted
during consultation. Using the base-case throughput of 200 people per year, the
new voucher price reduced the cost to £362.94 per person tested. An alternative
annual licence option reduced this further to £223.50 per person tested. The
base-case cost of CAAS vFFR with a throughput of 200 people per year was
£172.18 per person tested. This included staff training and annual maintenance
and was based on the purchase of a perpetual licence, which allows analysis of
as many people as needed per year. The model did not consider a cost for
invasive coronary angiography because all people who entered the diagnostic
model had this test.
3.49 The unit cost for FFR and iFR was estimated as the difference between the
activity weighted average of the healthcare resource group codes for complex
and standard cardiac catheterisation (£436.80).
Assumptions
3.50 The following assumptions were applied in the base-case analysis:
• A diagnostic threshold of 0.80 was used to define functionally significant
stenosis for QAngio QFR and FFR.
• A grey-zone boundary of 0.78 to 0.84 for QAngio QFR was used as
suggested by the manufacturer of QAngio QFR.
• The baseline risk of major adverse cardiovascular events in the absence of
revascularisation depends on disease severity as measured by FFR, while the
distribution of FFR values differs by diagnostic strategy.
• There is no treatment effect of revascularisation on risk of major adverse
cardiovascular events, based on the findings of the ISCHEMIA trial.

• Costs of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR were based on an average annual
throughput of 200 people.
• The base case assumed all diagnostic procedures took place in an
interventional setting. The diagnostic-only setting was considered in scenario
analyses.
• HRQoL benefits of revascularisation and optimal medical therapy observed at
1 year for the true positive and false negative health states applied for a
lifetime duration.
• Procedural disutility associated with FFR was equivalent to that of
percutaneous coronary intervention.
Base-case results
3.51 The deterministic and probabilistic cost-effectiveness results for the base-case
analysis, expressed in terms of net health benefit at a maximum acceptable
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £20,000 per QALY gained, are
shown in tables 8 and 9, respectively. The incremental net health benefit was
calculated for each strategy compared with invasive coronary angiography alone.
The results were consistent for both the deterministic and probabilistic analysis.
Table 8 Deterministic cost-effectiveness results for base-case scenario
Total Total NHB
Strategy Identification NHB INHB
QALYs costs rank
1 ICA alone 11.061 £4,697 10.826 – 5
2 ICA with FFR 11.096 £4,825 10.855 0.029 1
3 ICA with QAngio QFR 11.087 £4,812 10.847 0.020 2
ICA with QAngio QFR and confirmatory FFR
4 11.093 £5,019 10.843 0.016 3
(grey zone)
5 ICA with CAAS vFFR 11.098 £5,118 10.842 0.016 4
NHB and INHB are measured at a maximum acceptable ICER of £20,000 per QALY gained.
Incremental NHB is relative to ICA alone. Abbreviations: ICA, invasive coronary
angiography; FFR, fractional flow reserve; QFR, quantitative flow ratio; vFFR, vessel FFR;

QALY, quality-adjusted life year; NHB, net health benefit; INHB, incremental NHB.
Table 9 Probabilistic cost-effectiveness results for base-case scenario
Probability cost effective
Total NHB
Strategy Identification Total costs NHB INHB at £20,000 per QALY
QALYs rank
gained
1 ICA alone 11.039 £4,696 10.804 – 5 0.100
2 ICA with FFR 11.073 £4,825 10.831 0.027 1 0.278
3 ICA with QAngio QFR 11.065 £4,813 10.824 0.020 2 0.218
ICA with QAngio QFR and
4 confirmatory FFR (grey 11.070 £5,020 10.819 0.015 4 0.199
zone)
5 ICA with CAAS vFFR 11.076 £5,119 10.820 0.016 3 0.204
NHB and INHB are measured at a maximum acceptable ICER of £20,000 per QALY gained.
Incremental NHB is relative to ICA alone. Abbreviations: ICA, invasive coronary
angiography; FFR, fractional flow reserve; QFR, quantitative flow ratio; vFFR, vessel FFR;
QALY, quality-adjusted life year; NHB, net health benefit; INHB, incremental NHB.
3.52 Strategy 2 (invasive coronary angiography with FFR) had the highest net health
benefit and the highest probability of being cost effective, although the
differences between all the strategies were small. Strategy 1 (invasive coronary
angiography alone) was the cheapest and had the lowest QALY gain, while
strategy 5 (invasive coronary angiography with vFFR) was the most expensive
and had the highest QALY gain.
Analysis of alternative scenarios
3.53 Results from the scenario analyses showed that the base-case results were
generally robust when alterations were made to the sources of data used in the
model and when different assumptions were made. However, sometimes these
alterations resulted in significant changes to the net health benefit rankings of
the different strategies.
3.54 In the base case, the diagnostic accuracy estimates for vFFR were based on the

FAST EXTEND study (sensitivity 97.0% and specificity 74.0%), the largest study of
vFFR (330 patients). Using accuracy estimates from ILUMIEN I reduced the cost
effectiveness of vFFR, but estimates from Jin et al. (2019) increased it. This
resulted in vFFR being the second most cost-effective strategy. This highlighted
the substantial uncertainty surrounding the cost effectiveness of vFFR in strategy
5.
3.55 When QAngio QFR was considered to have the same diagnostic accuracy as FFR
(that is, 100% sensitivity and specificity), the total QALYs and costs for strategy 3
increased by 0.017 QALYs and £6 per person from the base-case scenario. In this
scenario strategy 3 became cost effective with the highest net health benefit,
largely because of greater total QALYs gained for strategy 3 compared with
strategy 2. This difference was mainly because of the procedural disutility
associated with FFR or iFR.
3.56 When the procedural disutility of FFR was more than that used in the base case,
the net health benefit of strategies 2 and 4 were affected most. The total QALYs
for both strategies were reduced, resulting in strategy 2 becoming the second
least cost effective and strategy 3 the most cost effective. An FFR disutility of
0.014 QALYs resulted in an equal net health benefit for strategies 2 and 3. This
procedural disutility was 2.5 times greater than that associated with
percutaneous coronary intervention, but less than half the disutility associated
with coronary artery bypass graft.
3.57 In terms of how duration of HRQoL affected cost effectiveness, the benefits need
to last for at least 7 years to offset the disutility associated with FFR or iFR in the
base case for strategy 2 to remain more cost effective than strategy 3.
3.58 The benefits of revascularisation, in terms of improved HRQoL, suggested that
the sensitivity of test results was a more important driver of cost effectiveness
than specificity. This was because true positive test results translated into higher
QALY gains than mismanagement of false negative test results.
3.59 In a diagnostic-only setting, the large additional costs of repeating diagnostic
catheterisation at a subsequent appointment in an interventional centre for
strategies involving measuring FFR or iFR (strategies 2 and 4) meant that
strategies without this testing component were more cost effective. Strategy 3

(QAngio QFR alone) became the strategy with the highest net benefit, followed
by strategy 5 (CAAS vFFR alone).

4 Committee discussion
Clinical need
FFR and iFR are not frequently used so QAngio QFR and CAAS
vFFR may help with decision making during invasive coronary
angiography
4.1 Clinical experts explained that in general, physiological testing using fractional
flow reserve (FFR) and instantaneous wave-free ratio (iFR) is available but not
frequently used in the UK. People typically have an invasive coronary
angiography after a previous functional test (see section 2.4). Sometimes
decisions about revascularisation are based on the images from the invasive
coronary angiography, results of the previous tests and patient history. If the
revascularisation decision is still uncertain after invasive coronary angiography,
people may be referred for FFR or iFR. Using QAngio XA 3D quantitative flow ratio
(QAngio QFR) and CAAS vessel FFR (CAAS vFFR) during invasive coronary
angiography may provide more information to help with decision making. It could
also mean that in some cases clinical decisions could be made without needing
FFR.
Less invasive tests may benefit patients and carers by reducing
anxiety, unpleasant side effects and risk of complications
4.2 A patient expert explained the potential benefits of testing using QAngio QFR or
CAAS vFFR. These included reduced anxiety, discomfort and distress than more
invasive testing, which may be needed if a definitive treatment decision cannot
be made during the initial invasive coronary angiography. Using an invasive test
like FFR with a pressure wire means using an adenosine infusion. The committee
noted that around 30% of people may experience chest pain and shortness of
breath from this. These side effects usually pass quickly but can be distressing.
Around 3% of people may experience discomfort from the pressure wire itself and
there is a small risk of rupture of the blood vessel. By avoiding adenosine infusion
and a pressure wire, QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR could reduce unpleasant side

effects and risk of complications.
Clinical effectiveness
The diagnostic accuracy evidence for CAAS vFFR is highly
uncertain
4.3 The committee noted that there were only 3 studies using CAAS vFFR that
matched the inclusion criteria for review in the diagnostics assessment report.
These included 500 patients. The external assessment group (EAG) explained
that there was notable heterogeneity across this small number of studies and
that the meta-analyses of the CAAS vFFR studies should be interpreted with
caution. Where reported, there was a high exclusion rate because of
angiographic image processing issues. In 2 of the studies, the technology was
not used in the way it was intended (ILUMIEN I and Jin et al. 2019). The
committee concluded that the diagnostic accuracy of CAAS vFFR was highly
uncertain and recommended further research (see research recommendation
5.4).
The diagnostic accuracy of QAngio QFR appears to be similar to
FFR
4.4 The committee noted that 39 studies using QAngio QFR matched the inclusion
criteria for the review in the diagnostics assessment report. These included
5,440 patients. These studies showed that QAngio QFR had good diagnostic
accuracy to predict the FFR result. The clinical experts explained that there was
good agreement between QFR and FFR values particularly at the extremes of
measurement. While there was some disagreement between QFR and FFR results
within the grey zone, (in the range of 0.78 to 0.84), the clinical experts noted that
there is likely to be a limited clinical effect of not identifying someone with an FFR
of between 0.76 and 0.80, that is, a false negative result. A more significant effect
could occur for people with an FFR result of less than 0.76 who have a negative
result on QAngio QFR (0.80 or higher). The EAG noted that modelling suggested
around 3% of people with an FFR result of less than 0.76 would be misdiagnosed

if using QFR for functional imaging. Clinical experts also explained that with FFR
values close to the 0.80 cut-off, it is unclear whether there is any added benefit
of revascularisation compared to optimal medical therapy. The committee
concluded that there was good agreement between QAngio QFR and FFR values.
Although there was some uncertainty around the grey zone, this was not a
particular concern.
Technical failure rates in diagnostic-only centres may be higher
because of lower quality angiography images
4.5 In the UK, invasive coronary angiography is usually done in diagnostic-only
catheter laboratories or in interventional catheter laboratories that can also do
percutaneous coronary intervention in the same procedure. Clinical experts
explained that the quality of angiography images from diagnostic-only centres
was generally lower than those from interventional centres. This is because in the
diagnostic centre, invasive coronary angiography is done so the information can
be used to guide decisions about what further testing and treatment might be
needed. In the interventional centre, invasive coronary angiography is often done
to help plan percutaneous coronary intervention. Clinical experts noted that
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR need high-quality angiography images so in
diagnostic centres the tests may have a high technical failure rate. The
committee concluded that because all the data considered were from
interventional centres, it was not certain what the technical failure rate would be
in diagnostic-only centres.
It is unclear how clinical history and symptoms affect clinical
decisions based on QAngio QFR or CAAS vFFR results
4.6 The NICE guideline on assessment and diagnosis of chest pain of recent onset
recommends invasive coronary angiography as a third-line test. People who have
invasive coronary angiography should have already had a previous assessment
such as 64-slice coronary angiography and non-invasive functional imaging tests,
but this may vary between centres. Some people may also have HeartFlow
FFRCT which is recommended in the NICE medical technologies guidance on
HeartFlow FFRCT for estimating FFR from coronary CT angiography. The clinical

experts explained that these previous assessments can rule out the need for
interventional treatment. Therefore, it is likely that people who do go on to have
invasive coronary angiography have more severe disease than the people in the
diagnostic accuracy studies. While the previous functional assessments may be
used to guide further testing decisions such as whether to do an FFR, the QAngio
QFR and CAAS vFFR results would be used to guide high-level treatment
decisions with substantial consequences. Therefore, clinicians need to be
confident that making a decision based on the results of these tests would lead
to improved outcomes for patients. The committee commented that the
diagnostic accuracy studies did not incorporate clinical history and the effect
that symptoms had on decision making based on the QAngio QFR result.
Therefore, it is unclear how this additional information combined with a QAngio
QFR or CAAS vFFR result affects clinical decision making about revascularisation.
QAngio QFR may slightly increase revascularisation rates
compared with FFR but this is uncertain
4.7 The EAG did a simulation study analysis to investigate the possible effect of using
QAngio QFR compared with invasive coronary angiography and FFR on coronary
outcomes such as revascularisation rates and major adverse cardiovascular
events. QAngio QFR (with or without a grey zone) led to slightly more
revascularisations compared with FFR (40.2% revascularisations using FFR
compared with 42.0% for QAngio QFR and 43.2% using the grey-zone strategy).
Both methods prevented broadly the same number of major adverse
cardiovascular events (FFR may prevent more major adverse cardiovascular
events but only for 1 in 1,000 people). However, the committee noted that the
simulation study made numerous assumptions, so its results were uncertain.
Clinical outcome data from large endpoint studies for QAngio
QFR and CAAS vFFR are needed
4.8 The clinical experts noted the lack of prospective outcome data when a QAngio
QFR or CAAS vFFR-based approach was used to guide revascularisation
decisions after invasive coronary angiography. The clinical experts explained that
there was a need for clinical outcome data from large endpoint studies comparing

these imaging software with FFR or invasive coronary angiography-guided
treatment. There are already multiple tests in the care pathway, and it was
unclear how QAngio QFR or CAAS vFFR could offer additional clinical benefit.
There are currently 2 ongoing clinical trials of QAngio QFR. The FAVOR III Europe-
Japan study will compare QFR with standard FFR-guided percutaneous coronary
intervention, and the FAVOR III China study will compare QFR with
angiography-alone guided percutaneous coronary intervention. These trials will
be completed in December 2023 and February 2023, respectively. There is 1
ongoing trial of CAAS vFFR. The LIPSIA STRATEGY trial will compare vFFR with
FFR for the assessment of intermediate coronary stenosis and is due to be
completed in November 2026. The committee concluded that data from trials like
these are essential to be confident that revascularisation decisions based on
QAngio QFR or CAAS vFFR results would improve patient outcomes (see research
recommendation 5.3).
Cost effectiveness
The disutility associated with FFR or iFR used in the model may
not be appropriate
4.9 In the model the procedural disutility for FFR was assumed to be the same as for
percutaneous coronary intervention. This was because no data were available on
the disutility of FFR. The clinical experts explained that this assumption may not
accurately reflect the actual side effects or people's experiences of the
procedure. The EAG also looked at different scenario analyses where the disutility
of FFR was increased. The committee commented that a disutility equivalent to
percutaneous coronary intervention was likely too high. This affected the cost
effectiveness of FFR more than might be expected in clinical practice. It noted
further that there were important differences between FFR and iFR that were
considered the same in the model. Because iFR does not need a hyperaemic
agent such as adenosine, it avoids the associated unpleasant side effects. This
disutility was a key driver of the cost-effectiveness results, but because of a lack
of evidence it was uncertain what disutility should be used. The committee
recommended further research into the disutility associated with FFR (see
research recommendation 5.1).

Test costs may not be accurate because test failure rates are not
adequately captured in the model
4.10 Test failure rates were high in the studies, especially the retrospective ones,
because the invasive coronary angiography images were not good enough to run
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR. The committee noted that in clinical practice some
images may not be of a sufficient quality for the software programs to produce a
result. Therefore, the cost per test may have been underestimated because test
failure rates were not factored into the model. Only people who had a QAngio
QFR or CAAS vFFR result were included. The EAG did a scenario analysis in which
patient throughput was varied, which affected the cost per test. However, the
committee noted that this may not have explored a wide enough range to
sufficiently capture this effect. It suggested that failure rates in routine clinical
practice would be reduced over time as the operator gained experience in using
the system. However, the clinical experts explained that this may be dependent
on the setting, with sub-optimal angiography images more likely in diagnostic-
only centres (see section 4.5). The committee concluded that further research on
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR failure rates in clinical practice would be beneficial
(see research recommendation 5.2).
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR are more cost effective than invasive
coronary angiography alone, but the results are uncertain
4.11 In the base case QAngio QFR was within the range NICE considers cost effective
compared with invasive coronary angiography alone in both the deterministic and
probabilistic analyses. However, the clinical experts commented that the strategy
of invasive coronary angiography alone was not representative of clinical
practice, where the results of previous tests and people's preferences would also
influence a treatment decision (see section 4.6). The committee noted that
similar results were seen for CAAS vFFR but concluded that there was greater
uncertainty in this result because of the lack of diagnostic accuracy evidence.

More data are needed because the clinical utility and cost
effectiveness of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR are uncertain
4.12 Compared with the reference standard of FFR or iFR, QAngio QFR (with and
without a grey zone) and CAAS vFFR were less cost effective (generated less
quality-adjusted life years [QALYs] but were slightly cheaper) in the base-case
analysis. However, the committee noted that a review of the accuracy of FFR or
iFR was not done by the EAG and they were assumed in the model to be 100%
accurate. It also noted that the difference between the new technologies and the
reference standard was small at 0.007 QALYs or £140 per person for QAngio QFR
and 0.011 QALYs or £220 per person for CAAS vFFR. Following an update to the
price structure of QAngio QFR by the company during consultation, QAngio QFR
using an annual licence became slightly cheaper but remained less clinically
effective than the reference standard of FFR or iFR. However, given the small
difference in costs and outcomes, the committee reiterated the need for clinical
outcome data from studies that directly compare QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR
with FFR or iFR (see research recommendation 5.3). These data would give
clinicians confidence in their decision making based on the results of the tests.
The committee concluded that given the uncertainty in clinical utility the cost-
effectiveness results were also uncertain.
The potential role of QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR in a diagnostic-
only setting is unclear
4.13 In a scenario analysis in which the tests were done in a diagnostic-only setting,
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR became the most cost-effective options in the fully
incremental analyses. This was because of the additional cost of onward referral
for the reference standard tests. However, clinical experts explained that fewer
people are having invasive coronary angiography because it is recommended as a
third-line test in the NICE guideline on assessment and diagnosis of chest pain of
recent onset (see section 4.6). The appropriate use of CT coronary angiography
and functional testing has resulted in a fall in the number of people having
invasive coronary angiography in diagnostic-only centres. Having an
angiographic procedure in an interventional centre means that invasive coronary
angiography, FFR or iFR and percutaneous coronary intervention can be done in a
single visit, if appropriate. This reduces the need for multiple hospital visits, which

has the potential to reduce people's anxiety. A clinical expert explained that
according to 2017 to 2018 data from the National Institute of Cardiovascular
Outcomes Research, around 35,000 invasive coronary angiography procedures
were done in diagnostic-only settings, compared with around 205,000 in
interventional centres. The committee concluded that the future role of QAngio
QFR and CAAS vFFR in a diagnostic-only setting is unclear because diagnostic-
only catheter laboratories are likely to decline in number.
QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR are not recommended for routine
use
4.14 The committee noted that QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR were more cost effective
than invasive coronary angiography alone. QAngio QFR using the proposed
annual licence was slightly cheaper but less clinically effective than FFR or iFR.
However, the incremental difference in terms of costs and QALYs between the
tests was small. For CAAS vFFR, the committee recalled that the diagnostic
accuracy data was highly uncertain so it could not be recommended for routine
use. The committee noted further that there were no clinical outcome studies for
QAngio QFR or CAAS vFFR, which meant that the EAG had to make assumptions
about treatment decisions and clinical outcomes, which led to uncertainty in the
results. The clinical experts commented that these tests may be used to guide
high-level clinical decisions about treatment, so clinicians need to be confident
when making decisions based on the tests' results. The committee considered
that clinical utility is uncertain and more data are needed. There were concerns
around the results of the simulation study that showed that QAngio QFR could
lead to an increase in revascularisations (see section 4.7). The committee also
recalled the trend in clinical practice of moving away from diagnostic-only
settings to interventional centres (see section 4.13) and considered that there
was too much uncertainty to consider QAngio QFR and CAAS vFFR in this
scenario. The committee concluded that because of the uncertainty in diagnostic
accuracy and clinical evidence, CAAS vFFR was not recommended. Despite
having good diagnostic accuracy evidence, QAngio QFR should not be
recommended for use until further data showing that it improves patient
outcomes are available.

5 Recommendations for further research
5.1 A patient experience study is recommended to better understand the general
effect on patients of having an invasive coronary angiography and the range and
severity of side effects and complications from QAngio XA 3D quantitative flow
ratio (QAngio QFR), CAAS vessel fractional flow reserve (CAAS vFFR), FFR and
instantaneous wave-free ratio.
5.2 Further research is recommended on test failure rates of QAngio QFR and CAAS
vFFR and how these affect clinical decision making for revascularisation in clinical
practice.
5.3 Outcome studies are needed to understand the clinical benefit of using QAngio
QFR and CAAS vFFR (see section 4.8). These include rates of major adverse
cardiovascular events, mortality and EQ-5D data to assess the effect on quality
of life.
5.4 More diagnostic accuracy studies are needed for CAAS vFFR against an
appropriate reference standard.

6 Implementation
NICE intends to develop tools, in association with relevant stakeholders, to help
organisations put this guidance into practice.
In addition, NICE will support this guidance through a range of activities to promote the
recommendations for further research. The research proposed will be considered by the
NICE Medical Technologies Evaluation Programme research facilitation team for
developing specific research study protocols as appropriate. NICE will also incorporate the
research recommendations in section 5 into its guidance research recommendations
database and highlight these recommendations to public research bodies.