Remote ECG interpretation consultancy services for cardiovascular disease
Summary
• The technologies described in this briefing are remote electrocardiogram (ECG)
interpretation consultancy services. They are used for assisting in diagnosing and
decision-making for people with cardiovascular disease.
• The innovative aspects are that with remote ECG interpretation, a person does not
need to travel to hospital for a consultation with a cardiologist, potentially providing
quicker and more accurate diagnoses.
• The intended place in therapy would be to replace referrals to secondary care for
interpreting ECGs from people with suspected cardiovascular disease.
• The main points from the evidence summarised in this briefing are from 4 UK pilot
studies including 26,320 adults and children in primary care. The studies show that
remote ECG interpretation consultancy services may reduce the number of
unnecessary referrals to secondary care and reduce costs for the NHS.

 
• Key uncertainties around the evidence or technology are that the economic benefits
are not yet clear and there is a lack of evidence for clinical outcomes. Published
evidence of clinical utility is only available for 1 out of 6 services in this briefing.
• The cost of the services in this briefing ranges from £3 to £195 per report (excluding
VAT). The resource impact may be cost saving because of reductions in secondary
care referrals.
The technology
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a recording of the electrical activity of the heart and is used
to diagnose cardiovascular disorders. Remote ECG interpretation consultancy services
provide expert analysis of ECGs to support clinical decision-making. The services can
receive and interpret ECGs – along with other information – using telephone and digital
methods. This briefing describes 6 services that are available in the UK (see table 1).
There are 3 main types of ECG:
• 12-lead ECG: the standard diagnostic test used in primary care for a number of
cardiovascular disorders. Ten electrodes are placed on the skin of the chest and limbs
to measure the electrical activity of the heart from 12 angles. The signal is recorded
for about 10 seconds.
• Holter/ambulatory ECG: a monitor is worn for a period ranging from a day to a week,
to record heart activity. The number of leads varies between manufacturers.
• Loop/event monitoring: captures unusual heart activity over longer periods, in some
cases up to 4 years.
An ECG of any type can be interpreted by a trained health professional or by dedicated
software. The services in this briefing all offer interpretation by expert staff at remote
locations. The ECG is transmitted from a primary care centre to the service provider. This
can be done automatically from devices supplied by the services (see regulatory
information). Alternatively, ECGs may be uploaded to the internet using a software
platform or webpage, or sent by email.
A cardiac technician, cardiac nurse, consultant cardiologist or specialist consultant
cardiologist such as an electrophysiologist interprets the ECG. Recordings from Holter,
loop and event monitors can be interpreted live. The signal can be continuously

 
transmitted to allow the interpreter to monitor activity in real time.
The interpreter returns a report with their ECG interpretation or recommendations to the
patient's primary care clinician within an agreed timeframe. All 6 of the services in this
briefing can receive ECGs recorded using any existing device. Three of the services are
also able to supply third-party devices.
Five of the 6 services in this briefing are based in the UK. Smart Telecardiology is based in
India and offers interpretation worldwide. The UK-based services all support transmission
using the N3 broadband network (with an NHS.net email address).
Table 1 summarises the remote ECG interpretation services included in this briefing. Other
similar technologies may be available but are not included (for example, if they were not
identified, or the company chose not to participate).
Table 1 Summary of included remote ECG Interpretation services
Proposed reporting
Company Transmission Interpretation Devices Modality
time
Instant report* or
consultant
cardiologist's or
electro-
NHS
physiologist's Under 12-lead,
email,
written patient care 24 hours; Holter,
MEOMED dedicated None.
plan with level of average loop/
software
urgency. Offers live 2 hours. event.
upload.
feedback between
GP and consultant
cardiologist after
report is returned.

 
Proposed reporting
Company Transmission Interpretation Devices Modality
time
Technician's written
report – if a
NHS consultant
12-lead,
email, cardiologist's
Primary Under Holter,
dedicated expertise is needed, None.
Diagnostics 24 hours. loop/
software the ECG can be
event.
upload. passed on to a
service such as
MEOMED.
Verbal report
Automatic Specialist nurse's or
returned
by cardiologist's Supplies/ 12-lead,
'immediately'
Broomwell telephone, reports – quality leases Holter,
and a full
Healthwatch or digitally control performed third-party loop/
written report
with NHS by consultant devices. event.
within 15 to
email. cardiologists.
20 minutes.
SCST-accredited Supplies/
Express NHS data analyst's Same day; up leases 12-lead,
Diagnostics email. report with pathway to 10 days.** third-party Holter.
recommendation.** devices.
SCST-accredited
cardiac
Within
Automatic physiologist's
24 hours or
– digitally written report with Supplies/
'immediately' 12-lead,
ECG On- with NHS level of urgency. leases
on request. Holter/
Demand email or Quality control third-party
Average event.
webpage performed by devices.***
turnaround
upload. consultant cardiac
2 hours.
electro-
physiologists.

 
Proposed reporting
Company Transmission Interpretation Devices Modality
time
4 to 48 hours,
Webpage
Technician's or depending on 12-lead,
upload or
Smart cardiologist's geographical Holter,
dedicated None.
Telecardiology downloadable location and loop/
online
report.** depth of event.
platform.
interpretation.
Abbreviations: ECG, electrocardiogram; SCST, Society for Cardiological Science and
Technology.
* If ECG is normal and no patient information is provided.
** Depending on the customer's needs.
*** Loaded with (Glasgow) interpretation algorithms. The algorithms identify potentially
abnormal ECGs, and the practice can decide to transmit only identified ECGs or transmit
all ECGs.
Innovations
Remote ECG interpretation consultancy services may provide diagnostic reports quicker
than with standard care. Interpretation takes between 15 minutes and 2 days and does not
need a person to travel to hospital for an appointment. This may be particularly useful for
specific populations, such as those who live in rural areas, people who work offshore and
prisoners.
Interpreting ECGs often needs in-depth knowledge and continuous practice, so ECGs that
are challenging to interpret are frequently referred to secondary care. Using remote ECG
interpretation services may reduce the number of unnecessary referrals to secondary care
and the number of misdiagnoses.
Current NHS pathway or current care pathway
A standard 12-lead ECG should be offered to:
• adults when atrial fibrillation is suspected (see NICE's guideline on atrial fibrillation)

 
• people aged 16 and over if they have experienced a blackout (see NICE's guideline on
transient loss of consciousness)
• adults with recent onset chest pain, in certain instances (see NICE's guideline on chest
pain of recent onset).
Other types of ECG may be taken in the above circumstances, if a 12-lead ECG is
inconclusive.
After taking an ECG, the practitioner can either: interpret the results and treat the person
themselves; refer the person to an NHS consultant; or refer the person for emergency
treatment. A referral to an NHS consultant cardiologist or electrophysiologist can take
between 2 and 18 weeks and the patient must travel to hospital.
Automated ECG interpretation services are related technologies that use algorithms to
interpret ECGs that are automatically uploaded to cloud networks or virtual private
networks (VPNs).
Population, setting and intended user
GPs or nurses in primary care take ECGs from people with suspected cardiovascular
disease. Remote ECG interpretation would replace a referral to an NHS consultant
cardiologist or electrophysiologist in secondary care. A GP, nurse or healthcare assistant
would record the ECG and then transmit the results to a remote location for interpretation.
The consultancy service would then send a report back to the GP or nurse, with a
recommendation for treatment.
Training may be needed for GPs to learn how to transmit the recorded ECGs and receive
the reports.

 
Costs
Technology costs
Table 2 Cost of remote ECG interpretation consultancy services
Company Cost (excluding VAT) Additional information
12-lead ECG service:
£14 to £30 per report.
Broomwell Price depends on speed of
Arrhythmia service – 24-hour tape
Healthwatch response and level of advice.
(Holter):
£30 to £50 per report.
Cardiologist 12-lead ECG service:
Price varies depending on
between £22 and £30 per report.
MEOMED the usage for a practice per
Arrhythmia service – (Holter): £65 per
annum.
report.
Price varies depending on
Primary
About £65 per analysis. the usage for a practice per
Diagnostics
annum.
12-lead ECG service: £14 to £25 per
report or a fixed monthly fee of £77
per 1,000-practice population,
irrespective of the number of tests
done.
Holter analysis: Holter analysis prices are
ECG On-
based on the duration of the
24 hours: £45 per report
Demand
ECG is recording.
48 hours: £70 per report
72 hours: £95 per report
7 days: £120 per report.
Consultant cardiologist
e-consultation: £42 per report.

 
Company Cost (excluding VAT) Additional information
Price depends on client
Fees for 12-lead ECG interpretation location, reading
Smart
start at £3 for a technician's report and cardiologists, turnaround
Telecardiology
£8 for a cardiologist's report. time for reports and practice
working hours.
Price depends on turnaround
Express 12-lead ECG service: £10 to £25.
time and recording time for
Diagnostics Holter analysis: £25 to £195.
Holter recordings.
Abbreviation: ECG, electrocardiogram.
Costs of standard care
The standard care in the NHS for ECG interpretation is referral to either emergency care or
a cardiology outpatient unit. The unit cost per attendance for a hospital emergency
department is £138 and for a cardiology outpatient appointment is £156 (Department of
Health and Social Care 2016).
Resource consequences
It is estimated that 34.7 ECGs per 1,000 patients are recorded annually in GP practices
(Wolff et al. 2012). Assuming that a GP practice sends all recorded ECGs to a service for
interpretation, then the likely use is about 35 ECGs per 1,000 patients.
Table 3 NHS use of interpretation consultancies
Service NHS use Training
Provided
Broomwell States that its services are currently used by around
free of
Healthwatch 70 CCGs in the UK.
charge.
States its service is used by CCGs, NHS trusts, GP Provided
ECG On-
alliances, and NHS healthcare providers such as mental free of
Demand
health trusts and HMP. charge.
Provided
Performed 3 pilot trials in Brent CCG, Liverpool CCG and
MEOMED free of
Vale of York CCG.
charge.

 
Service NHS use Training
Provided
Primary Has provided its service to Suffolk CCG for the past
free of
Diagnostics 6 years.
charge.
Provided
Express
States that its services are currently used by 20 CCGs. free of
Diagnostics
charge.
Provided
Smart
Not currently in use. free of
Telecardiology
charge.
Abbreviations: CCG, clinical commissioning group; ECG, electrocardiogram; HMP, Her
Majesty's Prison Service.
As long as the services are compliant with NHS communication networks such as the
N3 network or health and social care network, no changes to current infrastructure are
needed.
No published reports on the resource consequences of adopting the technology were
found. Broomwell Healthwatch provided the results of 3 audits of pilot studies performed
in Lancashire and Cumbria, Greater Manchester and Greater Birmingham. Cost savings
were estimated based on secondary care referrals that were prevented in 61 to 65% of the
cases. In Greater Birmingham, 1,934 audit forms were returned and the estimated cost
savings were £97,672. In Greater Manchester, 2,377 secondary care referrals were
prevented out of 3,732 ECGs, leading to estimated cost savings of £358,927. MEOMED
also provided the results of a number of pilot studies (see table 5). It estimated that its
service could save a 60-practice CCG between £730,000 and £1.816 million per year.
Regulatory information
Table 4 shows the regulatory status of the remote electrocardiogram (ECG) interpretation
consultancy services included in this briefing. Telehealth services operating in England
must be registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC). The CQC inspects these
services and reports on the quality of care provided.
Some of the services included in this briefing supply or lease medical devices from third
parties. These devices are regulated under the Medicines and Healthcare products

 
Regulatory Agency's (MHRA) medical devices directive and must carry a CE mark.
Table 4 Regulatory information
Company CQC registration Medical device and CE mark
• HeartView 12L and
HeartView 12i (Aerotel
Medical systems Ltd).
Broomwell Registered 19 May 2011. Last
Class IIa.
Healthwatch inspection report 28 March 2013.
• LifeCard (Spacelabs
Healthcare Ltd). Class IIa.
Will register with the CQC when
Intend to register with the CQC
MEOMED work begins (registration not needed
when work begins.
before starting contract).
Will register with the CQC when
Primary Intend to register with the CQC
work begins (registration not needed
Diagnostics when work begins.
before starting contract).
• eMotion Faros 90, 180 and
360 (Mega Electronics Ltd).
Class IIa.
ECG Registered 28 October 2015. No
On-Demand inspection reports to date.
• Cardioline TouchECG with
HD+, ECG100+, ECG200+
(Cardioline SpA). Class IIa.
• LifeCard (Spacelabs
Healthcare Ltd). Class IIa.
Express Registered 30 December 2010. Last
Diagnostics inspection report 5 September 2013. • eMotion Faros 90, 180 and
360 (Mega Electronics Ltd).
Class IIa.
Smart
Not registered. No information available.
Telecardiology

 
Equality considerations
NICE is committed to promoting equality, eliminating unlawful discrimination and fostering
good relations between people with particular protected characteristics and others. In
producing guidance and advice, NICE aims to comply fully with all legal obligations to:
promote race and disability equality and equality of opportunity between men and women,
eliminate unlawful discrimination on grounds of race, disability, age, sex, gender
reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity (including women
post-delivery), sexual orientation, and religion or belief (these are protected
characteristics under the Equality Act 2010).
People aged 65 or over are more likely to have cardiovascular disorders. Age is a
protected characteristic under the Equality Act 2010.
Clinical and technical evidence
A literature search was carried out for this briefing in line with the interim process and
methods statement. This briefing includes the most relevant or best available published
evidence relating to the clinical effectiveness of the technology. Further information about
how the evidence for this briefing was selected is available on request by contacting
mibs@nice.org.uk.
Published evidence
Four studies including 26,320 participants are summarised in this briefing. All 4 are pilot
studies, 3 relating to Broomwell Healthwatch and 1 to MEOMED and all were done in the
UK. One is an abstract reporting the results of a large pilot study (n=25,346) over 4 years.
Using these services resulted in improvement of appropriate referrals and this was found
to be cost saving. The average time to receive results was around 2 hours.
Table 5 summarises the clinical evidence as well as its strengths and limitations.
Overall assessment of the evidence
Broomwell Healthwatch and MEOMED were the only services for which there is publicly

 
available information. These services report results from pilot studies in the NHS and focus
on assessing the clinical utility of the service.
The primary outcome for all of the studies is the proportion of changes to care plans. The
potential utility of the service can be shown by evaluating differences between the remote
service's recommendation and the care pathway prescribed by the practitioner.
There is no direct within-study comparison between the services in this briefing. There are
also no comparisons between the services and other technologies, such as automatic
interpretation services. In the evidence included in this briefing, there was no follow-up of
outcomes to ensure that care pathway recommendations made by the service resulted in
improved clinical outcomes. There are also no comparisons of results between different
clinical commissioning groups or regions of the UK.
Table 5 Summary of Evidence
Paynter (2008)
Study size,
32 people with chest pain or transient loss of consciousness in a
design and
6-week pilot study in Bridgwater Community Hospital, Somerset, UK.
location
Intervention
Broomwell Healthwatch compared with automatic referral to acute
and
trust.
comparator(s)
16% of ECGs had abnormalities not detected by practitioner (that were
Key outcomes
identified by Broomwell Healthwatch).
The study did not report any power calculation. This was a single-
Strengths and centre pilot and so is not representative of other types of practice,
limitations such as GP surgeries. No economic information is reported and
outcomes are limited to descriptions of the prescribed care plan.
Albouaini et al. (2009)
Study size,
24,541 12-lead ECGs and 805 1-lead ECGs, in a 4-year pilot study in
design and
the Greater Manchester and Cheshire Cardiac Stroke Network, UK.
location
Intervention
and Broomwell Healthwatch compared with standard care.
comparator(s)

 
Paynter (2008)
In 15,698 people with symptoms (from 24,541 12-lead ECGs), 87.5%
were recommended for treatment in primary care; 6.5% were
recommended for secondary care and 6% recommended for
emergency care. In people with symptoms from lead-I ECGs, 96%
Key outcomes were recommended for treatment in primary care. All ECGs were
reported within 2 hours of their receipt. The prevention rate of
secondary care referrals was 65.8% of the total cases (95%
confidence interval 61.6 to 65.8%) and the extrapolated gross savings
were calculated to be over £300,000.
The study included a large number of ECGs, over 4 years, in multiple
Strengths and GP surgeries.
limitations Only the abstract is freely available, so there is no detail on the study
methodology.
Weatherburn et al. (2009)
Study size,
A total of 373 ECGs from people aged 8 to102 years, in a 6-month pilot
design and
study in Lancashire and Cumbria (NHS Northwest), UK.
location
Intervention
and Broomwell Healthwatch compared with standard care.
comparator(s)
There were 76 changes made to care pathways. In total,
14 unnecessary referrals to secondary care were avoided and
Key outcomes
18 people who the practitioner planned to only see in primary care
were referred to secondary care.
The study included results from 8 GP surgeries and 2 walk-in centres
Strengths and
and included people with a wide age range. Rates of use varied
limitations
between practices so economic outcomes are not given.
MEOMED Ltd Process Improvement Audit, Hall et al. 2015
Study size,
design and 569 people from 3 CCGs (see table 3) in the UK.
location
Intervention
and MEOMED compared with standard care.
comparator(s)

 
Paynter (2008)
Using the MEOMED service, 78% fewer patients were referred to
secondary care when compared to the standard pathway. A total of
37% of all patients – and 61% of all people with abnormal ECGs (256
from a total of 569) – had their condition managed in primary care,
based on MEOMED's management plan.
In the patients that the GP would have initially cared for in primary
care, MEOMED recommended, within 2 hours, that 29% be referred to
secondary care.
In addition, 24 unnecessary referrals were prevented in a group of
Key outcomes
30 patients that the GP would have referred to secondary care, based
on patient history alone.
A total of 5% of all patients were referred to secondary care by
MEOMED, based on patient history alone.
The average cost saving for a 60-practice CCG was estimated to be:
• £730,000, compared with a technician-led ECG service
• £1,816,000 compared with a standard hospital service.
The study included multiple practices across 3 CCGs. The report was
Strengths and
written by employees of MEOMED in collaboration with Trustech (NHS
limitations
Northwest innovation organisation).
Recent and ongoing studies
No ongoing or in-development trials were identified.
Specialist commentator comments
Comments on this technology were invited from clinical experts working in the field. The
comments received are individual opinions and do not represent NICE's view.
All 4 experts were aware of, or had used, the remote electrocardiogram (ECG)
interpretation services described in this briefing. Two experts believed that the services
were not being widely used in the NHS, while the other 2 were unsure or did not comment.

 
Level of innovation
Two experts believed that the services were novel, while another thought they were not.
One expert believed the services were only a minor iteration of current care that had not
been superseded.
One expert thought that some of these services were innovative because patient reports
could be written and interpreted by experienced clinicians who had access to patient
history. Two experts felt that non-commercial interpretation services available in their local
hospital coronary care unit by trained clinicians offered competition to the services
reported in this briefing because, in their opinion, they were either faster, free or better.
One expert mentioned that some services developed in hospital had a system to
immediately assess if ECG changes were new or pre-existing. They believed that this gave
their service an advantage over the commercial services in this briefing. On the contrary,
1 expert had to stop using a commercial service because their local trust chose to provide
their own in-house service instead. They felt that the commercial service was better than
the service provided by the local trust because it had a faster turnaround time and less
variability in reporting. One expert mentioned open access services for Holter monitors as
a similar technology but added that they were often poorly supervised and did not take
patient history into account.
Potential patient impact
All of the experts agreed that avoiding unnecessary hospital visits was a potential patient
benefit. Three experts also agreed that high-risk cardiac symptoms could be identified
earlier than with standard care and this would allow for earlier prevention or treatment to
begin. However, 1 expert also expressed concern that such services may be used
improperly in people with symptoms that need clinical review, such as acute chest pain or
unexplained syncope. One expert mentioned that some of these services may provide the
added reassurance to patients because the results would be reviewed by highly trained
clinicians.
The experts stated various types of patients would particularly benefit from these services
including: people with low-risk symptoms (history of vasovagal syncope, palpitations or
hypertension); people with a pre-existing ECG abnormality because a comparison to a
current ECG might prevent an unnecessary referral or because ECGs taken from Holter
monitors are more likely to be misinterpreted in primary care; older people or those with
mobility issues because there would be a reduced need for them to travel to hospital.

 
Potential system impact
All of the experts agreed that a potential reduction in non-emergency referrals to
secondary care specialist clinics would be a benefit to the health or care system. One
expert said this reduction could lead to cost savings in regions where links to secondary
care are poor. Another expert added that less money would need to be spent on
secondary care and more could be allocated to primary care. Two experts thought that
cardiac interpretation services could increase costs for their region but another expert
thought that there could be cost savings if cardiologist resources were used more
effectively by reducing unnecessary outpatient appointments. They added that this may
also lead to better resource allocation in secondary care.
Three experts felt that little to no change to current infrastructure would be needed to use
these technologies and that when needed they would presumably be provided by the
companies. One expert believed that advanced ECG interpretation skills would be needed
for clinicians to use any of the technologies.
Two experts expressed some concerns about the resource impact from adopting these
technologies. One thought that the interpreter would need to take a holistic view and take
clinical history into account for best management. They also felt that the most important
element of such services was the skill set of the interpreter. The other expert reiterated
that such services should not be used alone in managing high-risk symptoms and
expressed worry that some practitioners could become overly reliant on these services. A
third expert highlighted that primary care services would be expected to take
responsibility for clinical decision-making if not referring patients onward for additional
specialist follow-up. No safety concerns or regulatory issues were raised surrounding the
use of these technologies.
General comments
One expert mentioned that his knowledge of ECG analysis had improved after using an
ECG interpretation service. Another expert felt that establishing local, non-commercial
telemetry services should be attempted before using commercial providers. The expert
acknowledged that some regions may not manage to establish close collaborations with
their local hospital to successfully use non-commercial services. None of the experts had
an opinion on how the services will adapt to the end of the N3 network but stressed the
importance of continued data security. One expert expressed suspicion of services that
provide diagnostic guidance without assessing clinical presentation.

 
Three of the experts felt that the technology would be an addition to standard care, rather
than a replacement. One added that the services could be a replacement for outpatient
referral where links to local cardiology services are poor. The fourth expert agreed, stating
that the technology would replace the need to refer every patient for an initial outpatient
appointment.
Two experts identified information technology-related difficulties, such as network and
transmission problems, as the only practical issues with the services. One expert was not
convinced by the published research because of industry involvement and limited real-
world cost information. The expert felt that a pilot trial for an individual healthcare
organisation would provide more useful data as results may vary across different locations.
One expert thought that the services should agree to make audits of their performance
available to purchasers. This would be particularly informative if the results included
hospital referral rates and patient outcomes.
Specialist commentators
The following clinicians contributed to this briefing:
• Dr Jonathan Watt, consultant cardiologist, Raigmore Hospital, NHS Highland, member
of the British Cardiovascular Intervention Society. No relevant conflicts of interest.
• Mr Charlie Bloe, clinical ward manager, NHS Highland, member of SHARP (Scottish
Heart and Arterial disease Risk Prevention). Mr Bloe is the clinical lead and managing
director for a private healthcare education company and provides regular tuition to
healthcare professionals on electrocardiogram (ECG) interpretation.
• Dr Richard Schilling, professor of cardiology, Barts Health NHS Trust, member of the
British Heart Rhythm Society. No relevant conflicts of interest.
• Dr M C Patel, GP, Brent Clinical Commissioning Group. Dr Patel is a shareholder in
Harness GP Cooperative Ltd and chair of Harness Board. His patients were included in
an NHS England Regional Innovation-funded audit.
Development of this briefing
This briefing was developed for NICE by King's Technology Evaluation Centre. The interim
process and methods statement sets out the process NICE uses to select topics, and how