Subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm: diagnosis and management
Overview
This guideline covers diagnosing and treating an aneurysmal (caused by a ruptured
aneurysm) subarachnoid haemorrhage and its complications. It provides recommendations
to improve diagnosis and ensure that the most effective treatments are offered. It includes
guidance on follow-up care and information for people (aged 16 and over) who have had
an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, their families and carers.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners and providers of healthcare services for people with a suspected or
confirmed subarachnoid haemorrhage caused by a ruptured aneurysm
• People with an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, their families and carers

 
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 Assessment and diagnosis
NICE has also produced a visual summary of the recommendations on diagnosis.
Assessment and referral for diagnostic investigations
Initial assessment
1.1.1 Be aware that urgent investigation to confirm a diagnosis of subarachnoid
haemorrhage facilitates early treatment to prevent rebleeding from a ruptured
aneurysm and minimises disability and death.
1.1.2 When carrying out an initial assessment in a person who presents with
unexplained acute severe headache:
• have a high index of suspicion for subarachnoid haemorrhage
• take a careful history to establish the rate of onset and time to peak intensity
of the headache.
1.1.3 Bear in mind that:
• A 'thunderclap' headache (a sudden severe headache, typically peaking in

 
intensity within 1 to 5 minutes) is a red-flag symptom of subarachnoid
haemorrhage.
• Thunderclap headache is associated with other conditions or causes such as
migraine, cough, coitus or exertion. Most people with a thunderclap
headache do not have a subarachnoid haemorrhage, but this should not
deter further investigation if subarachnoid haemorrhage is suspected.
• People with subarachnoid haemorrhage can present with a range of non-
specific symptoms and signs and are at greater risk of a diagnosis being
missed. Other symptoms and signs of subarachnoid haemorrhage include,
but are not limited to:
－ neck pain or stiffness
－ photophobia
－ nausea and vomiting
－ new symptoms or signs of altered brain function (such as reduced
consciousness, seizure or focal neurological deficit)
－ limited or painful neck flexion on examination.
1.1.4 If a person with a possible subarachnoid haemorrhage finds it difficult to describe
their symptoms, for example because of a learning disability, language problem or
altered consciousness, ask anyone who witnessed the onset of symptoms for a
description (without delaying referral).
1.1.5 Refer people with suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage seen outside of acute
hospital settings to an emergency department immediately for further
assessment.
1.1.6 Ensure that people with suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage seen in acute
hospital settings such as emergency departments are reviewed urgently by a
senior clinical decision-maker to assess the person and think about alternative
diagnoses.
1.1.7 Refer the person for an urgent non-contrast CT head scan if review in secondary

 
care by a senior clinical decision-maker confirms unexplained thunderclap
headache, or other signs and symptoms that suggest subarachnoid
haemorrhage. Be aware that the diagnostic accuracy of CT head scans is highest
within 6 hours of symptom onset.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on assessment and
referral for diagnostic investigations.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
symptoms and signs and evidence review B: diagnostic accuracy of investigations.
Pain relief and neurological assessment
1.1.8 Ensure that people with a suspected or confirmed subarachnoid haemorrhage are
given effective pain relief, including opioid analgesia if needed. Document
administration of opioid analgesia in the person's healthcare record.
1.1.9 When conducting a neurological assessment, check the person's care record and
if opioid analgesia has been given, take into account its sedating and pupillary
effects.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on pain relief and
neurological assessment.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
medical management strategies.
Diagnosing a subarachnoid haemorrhage
1.1.10 Diagnose a subarachnoid haemorrhage if the non-contrast CT head scan shows
blood in the subarachnoid space.

 
1.1.11 If a CT head scan done within 6 hours of symptom onset and reported and
documented by a radiologist shows no evidence of a subarachnoid haemorrhage:
• do not routinely offer a lumbar puncture
• think about alternative diagnoses and discuss with a senior clinical decision-
maker
• seek advice from a specialist.
1.1.12 If a CT head scan done more than 6 hours after symptom onset shows no
evidence of a subarachnoid haemorrhage, consider a lumbar puncture.
1.1.13 Allow at least 12 hours after symptom onset before doing a lumbar puncture to
diagnose a subarachnoid haemorrhage.
1.1.14 Diagnose a subarachnoid haemorrhage if the lumbar puncture sample shows
evidence of elevated bilirubin (xanthochromia) on spectrophotometry.
1.1.15 Think about alternative diagnoses if the lumbar puncture sample shows no
evidence of elevated bilirubin (xanthochromia) on spectrophotometry.
Referral and transfer to a specialist neurosurgical centre
1.1.16 Urgently discuss with a specialist neurosurgical centre the need for transfer of
care of a person with a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage to a specialist
neurosurgical centre.
1.1.17 Do not use a subarachnoid haemorrhage severity score in isolation to determine
the need for, or timing of, transfer of care to a specialist neurosurgical centre. Be
aware that the risk of rebleeding is highest within 24 hours of the onset of
symptoms.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on diagnosing a
subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
diagnostic accuracy of investigations and evidence review C: severity scoring
systems.
Detecting an aneurysm
1.1.18 Offer CT angiography of the head without delay to people with a confirmed
diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage to identify the cause of the bleeding and
to guide treatment.
1.1.19 Diagnose an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage if:
• CT angiography of the head shows an intracranial arterial aneurysm and
• the pattern of subarachnoid blood is compatible with aneurysm rupture.
1.1.20 Seek specialist opinion without delay from an interventional neuroradiologist and
neurosurgeon if:
• CT angiography of the head shows an intracranial arterial aneurysm and
• the pattern of subarachnoid blood is not compatible with aneurysm rupture.
1.1.21 If CT angiography of the head does not identify the cause of the subarachnoid
haemorrhage and an aneurysm is still suspected, consider digital subtraction
angiography (DSA), or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) if DSA is
contraindicated.
1.1.22 Diagnose an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage if:
• DSA or MRA shows an intracranial arterial aneurysm and
• the pattern of subarachnoid blood is compatible with aneurysm rupture.

 
1.1.23 Think about other diagnoses if DSA or MRA does not show an intracranial arterial
aneurysm.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on detecting an
aneurysm.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review K:
diagnostic imaging strategies.
1.2 Managing a confirmed aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage
Medical management
Nimodipine
1.2.1 Consider enteral nimodipine for people with a confirmed subarachnoid
haemorrhage.
1.2.2 Only use intravenous nimodipine within a specialist setting and if enteral
treatment is not suitable.
Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
1.2.3 Manage the risk of venous thromboembolism in people with an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage in line with the NICE guideline on venous
thromboembolism in over 16s.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on medical
management.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
medical management strategies.
Managing the culprit aneurysm
1.2.4 An interventional neuroradiologist and a neurosurgeon should discuss the options
for managing the culprit aneurysm, taking into account the person's clinical
condition, the characteristics of the aneurysm, and the amount and location of
subarachnoid blood. They should document a proposed treatment plan based on
the following options:
• endovascular coiling
• neurosurgical clipping
• no interventional procedure, with monitoring to check for clinical
improvement and reassess the options for treatment.
1.2.5 Do not use a subarachnoid haemorrhage severity score in isolation to determine
the suitability of any management option.
1.2.6 If interventional treatment to secure the aneurysm is an option, offer:
• endovascular coiling or
• neurosurgical clipping if endovascular coiling is not suitable.
1.2.7 Discuss the proposed treatment plan and any alternative options with the person,
and their family or carers if appropriate, then agree and document a final
treatment plan (see recommendations 1.5.5 to 1.5.7).
1.2.8 If interventional treatment is planned, ensure that it is carried out at the earliest
opportunity to prevent rebleeding. Be aware that the risk of rebleeding is highest

 
within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing the
culprit aneurysm.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L:
interventions to prevent rebleeding, evidence review C: severity scoring systems and
evidence review M: timing of interventions to prevent rebleeding.
Other NICE guidance on endovascular procedures for culprit aneurysms
• NICE interventional procedures guidance on endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular
wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for intracranial aneurysms
• NICE interventional procedures guidance on coil embolisation of ruptured intracranial
aneurysms.
1.3 Monitoring and managing complications
Monitoring and investigating for deterioration
Transcranial doppler monitoring for deterioration
1.3.1 Do not use transcranial doppler monitoring to guide clinical management of an
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage except in the context of clinical research.
Unexplained neurological deterioration
1.3.2 For people with unexplained neurological deterioration after a subarachnoid
haemorrhage, offer a non-contrast CT head scan as the first diagnostic
investigation to determine the cause.

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on monitoring and
investigating for deterioration.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E:
monitoring for raised intracranial pressure and vasospasm.
Hydrocephalus
1.3.3 Base a diagnosis of acute or chronic hydrocephalus on the person's symptoms
and signs, and on a comparison of current and previous CT or other brain
imaging.
Acute hydrocephalus
1.3.4 Consider drainage or diversion of cerebrospinal fluid for people with neurological
deterioration caused by acute hydrocephalus.
Chronic hydrocephalus
1.3.5 For people with persistent or progressive symptoms and a clinical diagnosis of
chronic hydrocephalus, consider drainage or permanent diversion of
cerebrospinal fluid. If there is uncertainty about the likely benefit of permanent
diversion, consider a trial of temporary drainage to assess the need for
permanent diversion.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on hydrocephalus.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:
detecting hydrocephalus and evidence review H: managing hydrocephalus.

 
Delayed cerebral ischaemia
1.3.6 Ensure euvolaemia (normal blood volume) in people with delayed cerebral
ischaemia after an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and consider
treatment with a vasopressor if symptoms persist. Bear in mind that clinical
improvement from vasopressor treatment may be temporary.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on delayed cerebral
ischaemia.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:
management of delayed cerebral ischaemia.
1.4 Follow-up care
Follow-up care plan
1.4.1 Agree and document a plan for follow-up care with the person after their
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. Give a paper copy of the plan to the
person (and their family or carers if appropriate) and include details of who to
contact at the specialist centre for ongoing advice and support.
1.4.2 Include the follow-up care plan in the person's medical record and discharge
correspondence.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up care
plan.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review S:
patient information.

 
Rehabilitation
1.4.3 Offer rehabilitation after aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage in line with the
NICE guidelines on stroke rehabilitation in adults and rehabilitation after critical
illness in adults.
Follow-up neuroimaging
1.4.4 Consider follow-up neuroimaging for people who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage, taking into account the extent of their recovery and
the suitability of further imaging. Base the choice of imaging modality, and the
frequency and duration of imaging follow-up, on the:
• type and outcome of any neurointervention or neurosurgery on the initial
aneurysm
• presence of any non-culprit aneurysms
• estimated risk of further bleeding
• risks of planned investigations and any subsequent interventions
• person's preference.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on follow-up
neuroimaging.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review O:
imaging strategies for follow-up.
Managing non-culprit (unruptured) aneurysms
1.4.5 A multidisciplinary team (MDT) that includes an interventional neuroradiologist
and a neurosurgeon should evaluate the options for managing non-culprit
(unruptured) aneurysms, including:

 
• endovascular coiling
• neurosurgical clipping
• conservative management and follow-up monitoring.
1.4.6 When evaluating the options for managing a non-culprit aneurysm, the MDT
should take into account:
• the size and location of the aneurysm
• the estimated lifetime risk of the aneurysm rupturing
• the estimated risk of each treatment option
• any comorbidities
• the person's preferences.
1.4.7 Discuss the proposed management plan and any alternative options with the
person (and their family or carers as appropriate). Base the discussion on the
factors listed in recommendation 1.4.6. Agree and document a final management
plan.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing non-
culprit (unruptured) aneurysms.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review P:
non-culprit aneurysms.
Other NICE guidance on endovascular procedures for non-culprit (unruptured)
aneurysms
• NICE medical technologies guidance on Pipeline Flex embolisation device with Shield
Technology for the treatment of complex intracranial aneurysms
• NICE interventional procedures guidance on endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular
wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for intracranial aneurysms

 
• NICE interventional procedures guidance on coil embolisation of unruptured
intracranial aneurysms.
Managing other conditions after discharge from hospital
Hypertension
1.4.8 Manage blood pressure in people aged 18 and over who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage in line with the NICE guideline on hypertension in
adults.
Conditions treated with an antiplatelet or anticoagulant
1.4.9 Do not withhold treatment with antiplatelets or anticoagulants solely on the basis
of an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage if the culprit aneurysm has been
secured by coiling or clipping.
1.4.10 Balance the risks and benefits of treatment with an antiplatelet or anticoagulant,
taking into account specialist assessment of the risk of a future subarachnoid
haemorrhage.
Smoking
1.4.11 Encourage people who smoke to stop, and consider smoking cessation support
as set out in the recommendations on stop-smoking interventions in the NICE
guideline on tobacco.
Headaches
1.4.12 Assess, diagnose and manage headaches in people who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage in line with the NICE guideline on headaches in over
12s.
1.4.13 Be aware that headaches in people with a history of aneurysmal subarachnoid

 
haemorrhage:
• are common and generally benign
• may be due to chronic hydrocephalus if the person has additional symptoms
or signs such as gait disturbance, incontinence, incoordination or cognitive
impairment.
Seizures
1.4.14 Manage seizures in people who have recovered from an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage in line with the NICE guideline on epilepsies in
children, young people and adults.
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on managing other
conditions after discharge from hospital.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q:
long-term medicines for reducing the risk of subsequent subarachnoid haemorrhage
and evidence review R: long-term medication for managing the consequences of
subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Investigations to detect aneurysms in relatives
1.4.15 Explain to people (and their families if appropriate) who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage and are concerned about possible aneurysms in their
relatives that:
• routine testing to check for aneurysms in relatives has not been shown to
save lives or prevent aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhages
• testing for relatives is based on an assessment of the relative's own risk
• testing is usually limited to people with at least 2 first-degree relatives
(father, mother, sister or brother) who have had an aneurysmal subarachnoid

 
haemorrhage.
Tell people where they can find more information about testing for relatives,
such as the NHS webpage on diagnosis of brain aneurysm.
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation and how it
might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on investigations to detect
aneurysms in relatives.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are evidence review T:
investigating relatives of people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
1.5 Information and support
1.5.1 Follow the recommendations in the section on enabling patients to actively
participate in their care in the NICE guideline on patient experience in adult NHS
services, including:
• establishing the most effective way of communicating with the person and
providing information in a format that is accessible to them
• avoiding jargon, using words the person will understand and explaining
unfamiliar words.
1.5.2 When making decisions with people about their treatment and care, follow the
NICE guideline on shared decision making.
1.5.3 When supporting people who may lack capacity to make decisions about their
treatment and care, follow the NICE guideline on decision making and mental
capacity.
1.5.4 Adapt written and verbal information about aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage to the needs and preferences of the person (and their family or
carers if appropriate).

 
At diagnosis
1.5.5 Explain to the person (and their family or carers if appropriate) what an
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage is and what the treatment options are,
including their benefits and risks.
During the hospital stay
1.5.6 Give the person (and their family or carers if appropriate) information about
complications that can happen after an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage,
such as:
• a build-up of fluid on the brain (hydrocephalus)
• a reduced supply of blood to the brain (delayed cerebral ischaemia)
• speech or communication difficulties
• physical disabilities
• seizures.
1.5.7 Tell the person (and their family or carers if appropriate) that common symptoms
reported by people who have had a subarachnoid haemorrhage include:
• headaches, fatigue and sleep disturbances
• anxiety, low moods and increased irritability
• problems with memory and cognitive function
• changes to smell, taste, hearing or vision.
1.5.8 Give people who wish to receive it (and their family or carers if appropriate)
information about their estimated future risk of another subarachnoid
haemorrhage. Base the information on specialist assessment by the MDT of the
person's medical circumstances, including:
• the effectiveness of the treatment of the ruptured aneurysm

 
• the presence and growth of additional aneurysms
• their smoking status.
1.5.9 Give the person advice on returning to their usual activities including work,
exercise, driving and sexual activity.
At discharge
1.5.10 Check that the person has been given advice about wound care and medicines, a
copy of their follow-up care plan and details of who to contact at their specialist
centre if they have questions or concerns. Give them details of local and national
support groups.
At follow-up
1.5.11 Discuss the person's return to their usual activities (see recommendation 1.5.9).
For a short explanation of why the committee made these recommendations and how
they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on information and
support.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review S:
patient information and evidence review N: risk of subsequent subarachnoid
haemorrhage.
Terms used in this guideline
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline.
Senior clinical decision-maker
A clinician with the necessary training and experience to assess people with suspected
subarachnoid haemorrhage, confirm subarachnoid haemorrhage symptoms and signs, and

 
refer people for further investigation. This may be a consultant, a staff-grade, associate-
specialist or specialty doctor, or a doctor in a training grade who has been delegated to do
this because they have the necessary competencies.

 
Recommendations for research
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
Key recommendations for research
1 Timing of CT head scans
What is the relative accuracy of CT head scans at different time intervals, for example
12 hours or 24 hours after symptom onset, to diagnose subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on diagnosing a subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
diagnostic accuracy of investigations.
2 Predictors of death and disability
What variables predict death or disability for people with aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on diagnosing a subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:
severity scoring systems.
3 Nimodipine
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of nimodipine in the management of aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage?

 
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on nimodipine.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
medical management strategies.
4 Novel endovascular interventions
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of novel endovascular techniques and devices
such as coated coils, endoluminal flow diverters and intrasaccular devices to treat
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on managing the culprit aneurysm.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L:
interventions to prevent re-bleeding.
5 Risk stratification tool to estimate risk of recurrence
What is the utility of a risk stratification tool to estimate the risk of subsequent aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on information and support.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review N:
risk of subsequent subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Other recommendations for research
6 Interventions for aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage in

 
people with major neurological deficit
What is the outcome of intervention to prevent rebleeding in people who present with or
rapidly develop severe neurological deficits as a consequence of acute aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on managing the culprit aneurysm.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review L:
interventions to prevent re-bleeding.
7 Managing acute hydrocephalus
What is the most clinically and cost-effective method of cerebrospinal fluid drainage or
diversion (for example shunt surgery, external ventricular drain surgery or lumbar drain) for
symptomatic acute hydrocephalus?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on hydrocephalus.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
managing hydrocephalus.
8 Transcranial doppler monitoring
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of routine transcranial doppler monitoring to
guide clinical management of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on monitoring and investigating for deterioration.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E:
monitoring for raised intracranial pressure and vasospasm.

 
9 Intracranial hypertension
What is the impact of routine monitoring of intracranial hypertension on subsequent
management and outcome in people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage who are
unconscious or ventilated on an intensive care unit?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on intracranial hypertension.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review I:
detecting intracranial hypertension and evidence review J: managing intracranial
hypertension.
10 Intra-arterial therapies to manage delayed cerebral ischaemia
What is the impact of intra-arterial therapies to manage delayed cerebral ischaemia on
outcome in people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on delayed cerebral ischaemia.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:
management of delayed cerebral ischaemia.
11 Vasopressors to manage delayed cerebral ischaemia
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of vasopressors to manage delayed cerebral
ischaemia in people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on delayed cerebral ischaemia.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:
management of delayed cerebral ischaemia.

 
12 Blood pressure targets
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of a lower blood pressure treatment target
relative to the standard blood pressure treatment target for people with aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on managing other conditions after discharge from
hospital.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review Q:
long-term medicines for reducing the risk of subsequent subarachnoid haemorrhage.
13 Investigations for relatives
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of investigations to detect intracranial arterial
aneurysms in first-degree relatives of people who have had an aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage?
For a short explanation of why the committee made this recommendation for
research, see the rationale section on investigations to detect aneurysms in relatives.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review T:
investigating relatives of people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.

 
Rationale and impact
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the recommendations and how
they might affect practice.
Assessment and referral for diagnostic
investigation
Recommendations 1.1.1 to 1.1.7
Why the committee made the recommendations
People with a suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage can present with a wide range of
symptoms and signs. There was little evidence to indicate which symptoms or signs
specifically point to a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage. The committee agreed that
the consequences of a missed diagnosis may be severe and include disability and death.
Urgent investigation is required to confirm a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage and
facilitate early treatment to prevent rebleeding from the ruptured aneurysm. Clinicians
should therefore be alert to the possibility of subarachnoid haemorrhage in people
presenting with unexplained acute severe headache, reduced consciousness, seizure,
focal neurological deficit or other suggestive symptoms. Some people present with non-
specific symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting, photophobia, or neck pain or stiffness.
In these cases, a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage is more likely to be missed.
The committee's experience indicated that a 'thunderclap' headache is a presenting
symptom in most people with a subarachnoid haemorrhage. However, they noted that this
type of headache is a common presentation in emergency departments and around 10% of
people who present with this symptom have a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage
confirmed; the majority are diagnosed with other conditions, for example, migraine. The
committee agreed that other symptoms and signs are also commonly seen in people with
a subarachnoid haemorrhage. These can be used, together with clinical judgement, to
support clinical assessment and guide decisions on further diagnostic investigations. The
committee noted that these symptoms and signs of subarachnoid haemorrhage can also
be caused by a number of other conditions. Therefore, a senior clinician should confirm
the assessment of subarachnoid haemorrhage and arrange immediate referral for further

 
investigation.
There is good evidence showing that non-contrast CT head scans carried out within
6 hours of symptom onset are highly accurate and can be used to rule out a diagnosis of
subarachnoid haemorrhage, therefore avoiding the need for further investigation with a
lumbar puncture. CT head scans done more than 6 hours after symptom onset are less
accurate (see the section on diagnosing a subarachnoid haemorrhage for more
information).
Evidence on decision tools, including the Ottawa Subarachnoid Haemorrhage Rule for
Headache Evaluation, showed that these tools have a high level of accuracy in ruling out
subarachnoid haemorrhage, but are less accurate at ruling it in, with a large number of
false-positive identifications. Although these tools are beneficial in ensuring that no cases
are missed, over-reliance on them risks harm from unnecessary imaging and invasive
investigations. The committee noted that the tools use a broad range of symptoms and
signs that are not specific to subarachnoid haemorrhage.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations may be useful for non-specialist clinicians, but are not expected to
lead to significant changes in practice. Non-contrast CT head scans are the usual first-line
investigation for suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage, and this is not expected to
change.
Return to recommendations
Pain relief and neurological assessment
Recommendations 1.1.8 and 1.1.9
Why the committee made the recommendations
Although there was limited evidence on the use of specific analgesia or sedation, the
committee agreed that pain in adults with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage should
be managed with analgesics in line with standard clinical practice. Headache is usually
treated with simple analgesics such as paracetamol, escalating to opioids as needed. The
committee agreed that the sedative and pupillary effect of opioid analgesics should be

 
taken into account when doing a neurological assessment, but should not preclude their
use.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations generally reflect current practice and are not likely to result in
changes.
Return to recommendations
Diagnosing a subarachnoid haemorrhage
Recommendations 1.1.10 to 1.1.17
Why the committee made the recommendations
The committee looked at evidence on non-contrast CT head scans, lumbar puncture and
MRI. In the studies, the CT scans were reviewed by either a general radiologist or a
neuroradiologist. There was good evidence showing that CT head scans done within
6 hours of symptom onset have a high diagnostic accuracy. Taking into account the
invasive risks of lumbar puncture, the difficulty of monitoring patients during MRI and the
costs of both procedures, the committee concluded that these procedures should not be
routinely offered if a CT head scan, done within 6 hours of symptom onset and reported
and documented by an appropriately experienced radiologist, shows no evidence of a
subarachnoid haemorrhage. In these circumstances alternative diagnoses should be
considered and advice sought from a specialist, for example in neurosurgery,
neuroradiology, neurology or stroke medicine.
If the CT head scan is done more than 6 hours after symptom onset, the evidence showed
that diagnostic accuracy is reduced and false-negative results are more likely. The
committee therefore agreed that further investigation with a lumbar puncture should be
considered if a CT head scan done more than 6 hours after ictus does not confirm the
diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage.
When a lumbar puncture is indicated, the committee agreed that it should be done at least
12 hours after symptom onset, when bilirubin formation is sufficient to be detected
reliably. The committee considered that the diagnostic accuracy of earlier lumbar puncture

 
(to detect blood in the cerebrospinal fluid) is likely to be low because it can take several
hours for blood to appear in the lumbar subarachnoid sac.
There was limited evidence on the relative accuracy of non-contrast CT head scanning at
various time intervals greater than 6 hours after symptom onset, so the committee made a
recommendation for research on timing of CT head scans.
Referral and transfer to a specialist neurosurgical centre
If subarachnoid haemorrhage is diagnosed, the committee noted that an urgent decision is
needed on whether to transfer the person to specialist care. The committee decided to
make a consensus recommendation to stress the importance of an urgent discussion with
a specialist neurosurgical centre.
Although evidence on a number of severity scores showed an association with morbidity
and mortality, there was inconsistency across the scores and the evidence was not
sufficient to recommend the use of any score on its own. The committee agreed that,
although severity scoring can be a useful clinical descriptor, decisions on transfer should
be based on a holistic patient assessment rather than a severity score on its own, to avoid
inappropriate withholding of specialist neurosurgical care from people whose score
indicates a poor clinical condition.
The committee noted that evidence to support the prognostic accuracy of the severity
scores was weak and made a recommendation for research on predictors of death and
disability.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Centres that routinely perform lumbar puncture after a negative CT head scan may see a
reduction in the use of lumbar puncture in people with an early negative CT head scan.
Reliance on severity scoring to determine transfer to specialist centres may reduce,
leading to more people appropriately being transferred for treatment.
Return to recommendations
Detecting an aneurysm
Recommendations 1.1.18 to 1.1.23

 
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence showed that CT angiography has a high level of accuracy in identifying
aneurysms causing subarachnoid haemorrhage but evidence for the diagnostic accuracy
of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was less compelling. CT angiography is the
quickest to perform, is non-invasive, does not usually necessitate sedation or general
anaesthesia and is available in most centres. MRA and DSA are more complex and time-
consuming procedures that need specialist input and have a higher risk of complications.
DSA is regarded as the 'gold standard' investigation and is currently commonly carried out
when CT angiography is negative but there is a high suspicion of aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage, whereas the complexities involved in obtaining high-quality
MRA images make this less beneficial. The committee agreed that DSA should be reserved
for instances when CT angiography has not detected a suspected aneurysm.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations largely reflect current practice and are not expected to lead to
changes.
Return to recommendations
Medical management
Recommendations 1.2.1 to 1.2.3
Why the committee made the recommendations
Nimodipine
Although limited evidence showed some reductions in mortality, rebleeding, disability and
delayed cerebral ischaemia with nimodipine, most of the evidence available was graded as
low or very low quality, predominately due to imprecision of outcome data, and risk of bias.
There was a high risk of uncertainty around a number of outcomes due to significant
statistical imprecision around the summary effect estimates, with wide confidence
intervals crossing the thresholds for clinical significance.
The committee noted that the studies in the evidence review were conducted in the

 
1980s, with a lack of more recent evidence. In most of the studies, nimodipine was
commenced up to 96 hours after ictus and continued for up to 3 weeks before
neurosurgical management. Therefore, the committee had reservations about the
applicability of this evidence to current practice, in which people with aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage are frequently treated by endovascular coiling within 48 hours
of ictus. The committee could not be sure that the benefits from nimodipine are
maintained with current treatments to secure the ruptured aneurysm, but they agreed
that, without evidence of significant harms, a recommendation to consider nimodipine was
appropriate in the acute management of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
The committee noted that the use of nimodipine is entrenched in clinical practice and was
surprised at the lack of more compelling contemporary evidence for the use of enteral
nimodipine in the management of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. The lack of
recent evidence influenced their decision to make a weak recommendation for the use of
nimodipine. The committee also made a recommendation for research on nimodipine to
determine its place in current practice.
Most of the evidence related to the use of oral nimodipine but some was drawn from
studies that included intravenous nimodipine. The committee were aware that intravenous
nimodipine has a high cost and were uncertain whether it is likely to be cost effective in
patients who are unconscious or ventilated, or unable to swallow. The committee were
also aware that some clinicians recommend administration of crushed nimodipine tablets
to these patients via a nasogastric tube to avoid the need to use intravenous nimodipine.
The committee noted that intravenous nimodipine may be useful for patients in whom poor
absorption of the drug is suspected. Based on these observations and their experience,
the committee agreed that intravenous nimodipine should be reserved for patients in
whom enteral administration is not suitable.
Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
The committee noted that NICE's guideline on reducing the risk of hospital-acquired
venous thromboembolism (VTE) includes assessment of bleeding risk and alternatives to
pharmacological VTE prophylaxis, and is therefore suitable for people admitted to hospital
with a subarachnoid haemorrhage before their aneurysm is secured and after it is secured.
Short-course tranexamic acid
Evidence on tranexamic acid in the management of aneurysmal subarachnoid

 
haemorrhage was mixed, and most was from small studies from the 1970s and 1980s.
Some of the evidence suggested that short courses of intravenous tranexamic acid
started immediately after diagnosis and before a planned intervention (endovascular
coiling or neurosurgical clipping) reduce the risks of rebleeding. However, there was no
evidence showing that they reduce death or disability.
The committee were aware that short-course tranexamic acid is occasionally used in
current practice if interventional treatment to secure the aneurysm is suitable but not
available within a short time frame. However, the committee agreed that the administration
of tranexamic acid should not delay interventional treatment to secure the aneurysm.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Nimodipine
The recommendation is not expected to substantially change the current practice of giving
nimodipine after an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
The recommendation is not expected to change current practice.
Return to recommendations
Managing the culprit aneurysm
Recommendations 1.2.4 to 1.2.8
Why the committee made the recommendations
The committee noted that around half of people who survive an aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage will have a second bleed from the culprit aneurysm within weeks, and the
mortality from a second bleed can exceed 50%. Interventional treatment with
endovascular coiling or neurosurgical clipping, if suitable, can secure the aneurysm and
prevent rebleeding.
The committee acknowledged that interventional treatment is not suitable for some people

 
who have a major neurological deficit after an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, and
that the costs of long-term nursing care or rehabilitation can be considerable. Very little
evidence was found for this group, so the committee made a recommendation for research
on interventions for aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage in people with major
neurological deficit.
Severity scoring systems might help clinicians identify people for whom intervention is
likely to be justified, but none of the severity scoring systems currently in use reliably
predicts morbidity and mortality in people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. In
addition, the committee agreed that clinical state and severity score can vary over time,
especially soon after symptom onset. Decisions on clinical management should therefore
be based on a holistic patient assessment rather than solely on a severity score. Factors
that should be considered by clinicians and discussed with the patient include:
neurological status, performance status and comorbidities.
The evidence was not sufficient to determine the clinical effectiveness of endovascular
coiling compared with neurosurgical clipping, although a small amount of evidence
suggested that endovascular coiling might be more beneficial. Endovascular coiling is less
invasive and potentially safer, so the committee agreed that it should be offered as the
first option, taking factors such as aneurysm characteristics and the amount and location
of subarachnoid blood into account. The committee agreed that neurosurgical clipping
should be considered if endovascular coiling is not a suitable treatment option. They
stressed that any procedure to secure the aneurysm should be performed without delay to
minimise the risk of rebleeding.
Newer, more expensive interventional technologies are being used but there is little
evidence on their effectiveness, so the committee made a recommendation for research
on novel endovascular interventions.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Endovascular coiling accounts for around 75% of interventions done in current practice
and the recommendation is not expected to change this. Most interventions are carried
out within 48 hours of admission. However, this may vary according to the availability of
interventional neuroradiologists and vascular neurosurgeons, and the capacity of
neurosurgical centres. For people admitted during weekends, endovascular coiling should
be available from the same interventional neuroradiology teams who will provide
thrombectomy for stroke, in line with the recommendations on thrombectomy in the NICE

 
guideline on stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s. However, provision of
neurosurgical clipping during weekends may necessitate changes to services such as the
setting up of appropriate networks.
Return to recommendations
Monitoring and investigating for deterioration
Recommendations 1.3.1 and 1.3.2
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was no evidence on the routine use of direct intracranial pressure monitoring for
raised intracranial pressure. Very limited evidence from 1 study on transcranial doppler
monitoring for vasospasm suggested an increase in mortality, morbidity and length of
hospital stay compared with no transcranial doppler monitoring. The committee agreed
that these outcomes were unlikely to be directly caused by the transcranial doppler
monitoring. However, they were concerned that such monitoring might influence
subsequent decisions, for example about investigations or interventions, and so indirectly
affect outcomes. They therefore agreed that transcranial doppler monitoring should only
be used in the context of clinical research. The committee noted that there is increasing
enthusiasm for the use of this modality and made a recommendation for research on
transcranial doppler monitoring.
There was no evidence on the investigation of unexplained neurological deterioration in
people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. The committee agreed that in current
practice unexplained neurological deterioration is initially investigated with a non-contrast
CT scan, which can indicate the cause of deterioration including ventricular enlargement
suggestive of hydrocephalus, cerebral ischaemia, intracranial haematoma or evidence of
rebleeding.
How the recommendations might affect practice
In current practice the use of transcranial doppler monitoring varies widely. The
recommendation is likely to stop this type of monitoring in centres that use it in routine
practice. CT head scans are used to investigate unexplained neurological deterioration in
current practice and the recommendation will not affect this.

 
Return to recommendations
Hydrocephalus
Recommendations 1.3.3 to 1.3.5
Why the committee made the recommendations
Acute hydrocephalus
There was no evidence on diagnosing acute hydrocephalus. Based on their experience,
the committee agreed that hydrocephalus is suspected on the basis of symptoms and
signs of raised intracranial pressure such as an altered level of consciousness or
neurological deterioration, and that the diagnosis should be confirmed by comparing a CT
head scan with previous CT or other head scans to show an increase in the size of the
ventricular system. The committee agreed that MRI offers no advantage over CT for
diagnosing hydrocephalus in people with aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, is more
expensive and is a difficult procedure for people who are unwell.
The committee noted that acute hydrocephalus can lead to severe disability or death if not
treated promptly by drainage or diversion of cerebrospinal fluid. There was no evidence on
the effectiveness of different techniques for drainage or diversion in acute hydrocephalus.
The committee agreed that either drainage or diversion could be considered. They also
made a recommendation for research on managing acute hydrocephalus.
Chronic hydrocephalus
There was little evidence to inform recommendations on diagnosing and managing chronic
hydrocephalus. Based on their experience, the committee agreed that chronic
hydrocephalus is uncommon and typically presents several weeks or months after an
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, with reduced consciousness, gait disturbance or
other neurological symptoms. As with acute hydrocephalus, the committee agreed that
chronic hydrocephalus is suspected based on symptoms and signs and a diagnosis should
be confirmed based on a comparison of current CT head scans with previous CT or other
head scans.
In current clinical practice most people with persisting or progressive symptoms and

 
radiological evidence of ventricular dilatation are offered drainage of cerebrospinal fluid,
which improves symptoms in the majority. If the likelihood of symptom improvement is
uncertain, some clinicians advocate a trial of temporary drainage, for example, serial
lumbar punctures, before considering permanent diversion of cerebrospinal fluid. The
committee agreed with this approach.
The committee discussed making a recommendation for research on chronic
hydrocephalus but concluded that research in this area might not be feasible within a
reasonable time frame and have little impact on clinical practice.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations reflect current practice.
Return to recommendations
Intracranial hypertension
Recommendation for research
Why the committee did not make a recommendation
There was little evidence on diagnosing and treating intracranial hypertension. The
committee agreed that the diagnostic accuracies of transcranial doppler and ultrasound
measurement of optic nerve sheath diameter are too low for reliable detection of
intracranial hypertension when compared with direct intracranial pressure measurement.
The committee also acknowledged that there is no evidence that interventions to lower
intracranial pressure improve clinical outcome.
The committee agreed that raised intracranial pressure is common in people with
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, but intracranial hypertension that impedes blood
flow to the brain and contributes to brain injury is generally only seen in the most severely
ill. These people are usually unconscious or need ventilation in an intensive care unit. They
are a heterogeneous population and management varies widely, with some clinicians
advocating routine monitoring of intracranial pressure to guide intervention (such as
drainage of cerebrospinal fluid, hypertonic saline or vasopressor therapy) to lower
intracranial pressure and maintain cerebral perfusion. Other clinicians favour management

 
without intracranial pressure monitoring.
Intracranial pressure can be monitored by inserting an intracranial pressure bolt or using
an external ventricular drain inserted to manage acute hydrocephalus. The committee
acknowledged that insertion of a pressure bolt is associated with risk, and monitoring of
intracranial pressure will only improve outcome if it leads to effective intervention.
The committee debated the variation in current practice and were not able to reach a
consensus on the role of interventions to diagnose and treat intracranial hypertension, and
so they made a recommendation for research.
Return to recommendation for research
Delayed cerebral ischaemia
Recommendation 1.3.6
Why the committee made the recommendation
There was very little evidence on delayed cerebral ischaemia so the committee based the
recommendation on their clinical experience. They noted that current practice for
managing delayed cerebral ischaemia is to maintain cerebral blood flow to prevent or limit
cerebral infarction. Intravenous fluid is usually given to ensure euvolemia and if symptoms
persist a vasopressor is administered to raise systemic blood pressure. The committee
agreed with this approach, but added that the improvements seen after these measures
may be temporary, and there was no evidence of impact on longer-term outcomes.
Treatment for people whose condition is not improved by vasopressor therapy varies
widely. Some clinicians recommend cerebral angiography and intra-arterial therapies,
including intra-arterial vasodilators and angioplasty. However, the committee were unable
to reach a consensus on the use of intra-arterial therapies. They made recommendations
for research on intra-arterial therapies to manage delayed cerebral ischaemia and
vasopressors to manage delayed cerebral ischaemia.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice.

 
Return to recommendation
Follow-up care plan
Recommendations 1.4.1 and 1.4.2
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence from surveys and interviews with people who had an aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage showed that those who did not receive clear information about their medical
care after discharge felt anxious and 'abandoned'. Those who were given this information,
together with details of who to contact for ongoing advice, said they felt more supported.
The committee agreed that the follow-up care plan should be included in the person's
medical record and discharge correspondence.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The amount and quality of information given to people about follow-up care after an
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage varies. This recommendation can be expected to
improve the provision of this information.
Return to recommendations
Follow-up neuroimaging
Recommendation 1.4.4
Why the committee made the recommendation
No clinical evidence was found on follow-up neuroimaging. Based on their knowledge and
experience, the committee agreed that there is a risk of aneurysm recurrence, progression
of non-culprit aneurysms and formation of new aneurysms. They agreed that follow-up
imaging should be considered, based on the person's clinical situation and risk factors.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation reflects current practice.

 
Return to recommendation
Managing non-culprit (unruptured) aneurysms
Recommendations 1.4.5 to 1.4.7
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was not enough good evidence to enable the committee to recommend a preferred
management option for non-culprit aneurysms, although they agreed that the risk of a
non-culprit aneurysm rupturing is higher in people who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage than those who have not. Based on their experience, the
committee agreed that the overall probability of a non-culprit aneurysm rupturing is low, so
interventional treatment of all non-culprit aneurysms is unlikely to be a cost-effective
strategy. They agreed that conservative management usually includes monitoring of the
aneurysm with MRA to detect changes in the aneurysm's size or shape. The committee
were in agreement that the frequency of monitoring should be based on a balance
between the risks of aneurysm rupture and the risks of interventional treatment, and take
into account multidisciplinary team, neuroradiological and neurosurgical opinion, and the
person's preferences.
The committee's experience was that people with unruptured aneurysms who are offered
conservative management are often anxious about the possibility of a future rupture. They
therefore recommended that all treatment options be discussed with the person.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Current management of unruptured aneurysms varies. The recommendations are not
expected to lead to substantial changes in practice.
Return to recommendations
Managing other conditions after discharge from
hospital
Recommendations 1.4.8 to 1.4.14

 
Why the committee made the recommendations
Hypertension
Uncontrolled hypertension is recognised to be a risk factor for aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage and may pose a greater risk to people with a history of this type of stroke.
The committee agreed that blood pressure should be controlled in line with the NICE
guideline on hypertension in adults.
There was no evidence on long-term blood pressure control specifically for people with a
history of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, so the committee made a
recommendation for research on blood pressure targets.
Conditions treated with an antiplatelet or anticoagulant
There was little evidence about the effect of an antiplatelet or anticoagulant on the risk of
recurrent intracranial bleeding. The committee agreed that, in their experience, these
medicines are safe for people with a secured aneurysm following an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage. For people with a higher risk of recurrence, specialist advice
should be sought to judge the balance between the risk of recurrent or new intracranial
bleeding and the risk of athero-embolic events.
Smoking
The committee noted that smoking can be a risk factor for an initial subarachnoid
haemorrhage. They agreed that smoking cessation interventions, in addition to benefiting
general health, may also reduce the risk of recurrent subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Headaches
The committee agreed, based on their experience, that people who develop headaches
after recovering from an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage can become anxious and
worry that their headache indicates new aneurysmal bleeding or a complication of the
treatment they had for their aneurysm. This can lead to morbidity, multiple presentations
to healthcare professionals and unnecessary investigations. There was no evidence on
specific long-term medicines to relieve headaches as a consequence of subarachnoid
haemorrhage. The committee agreed that headache should be assessed, diagnosed and
managed in line with NICE's guideline on headaches in over 12s.

 
The committee agreed, based on their experience, that headaches are common and
generally benign in people who have had a subarachnoid haemorrhage, but in some
people may indicate chronic hydrocephalus.
Seizures
The committee agreed that people who have had an aneurysmal subarachnoid
haemorrhage have an increased risk of seizures and epilepsy. There was no evidence on
the use of long-term antiseizure medicines to prevent or relieve seizures in this population.
They agreed that seizures after an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage should be
treated in line with NICE's guidance on diagnosing and managing epilepsies.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations on hypertension, smoking, headaches and seizures are not
expected to change practice. The recommendations on managing conditions treated with
antiplatelets or anticoagulants may reduce delays in prescribing these medicines for
people who have had a successfully treated aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Although specialist input may be needed, this is not expected to have a large impact on
services.
Return to recommendations
Investigations to detect aneurysms in relatives
Recommendation 1.4.15
Why the committee made the recommendation
No evidence was found on investigating relatives for intracranial aneurysms. The
committee recognised that first-degree relatives of people who have had an aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage are at higher risk of intracranial arterial aneurysm than the
general population. The committee agreed that investigating for aneurysms in first-degree
relatives may produce health benefits but could also lead to harm, including unnecessary
anxiety and a consequent increase in visits to GPs and emergency departments. Moreover,
the optimal timing and frequency of investigations to detect and monitor intracranial
aneurysms in first-degree relatives is unknown.

 
The committee were aware that the NHS does not currently support routine screening for
intracranial arterial aneurysms in relatives and any change in NHS policy could have a
significant resource impact.
The committee acknowledged that in current practice investigation is typically only
recommended for people thought to have a significant risk of having a brain aneurysm that
could rupture at some point in the future, and this would usually only apply to people with
2 or more first-degree relatives who have had an aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.
This reflects the advice given on the NHS website on screening for brain aneurysms.
The committee agreed that the lack of evidence for routine testing of relatives and current
practice on testing should be explained to people who have had a subarachnoid
haemorrhage, and their families as appropriate. Given the importance of this issue and the
lack of evidence, the committee made a recommendation for research on investigations
for relatives.
How the recommendation might affect practice
The recommendation is not expected to lead to a change in practice.
Return to recommendation
Information and support
Recommendations 1.5.1 to 1.5.11
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence from studies using surveys and interviews with people who have had an
aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage showed that they value information that is clear,
concise and tailored to their own needs. Participants in the studies highlighted how
difficult it was to remember information given to them verbally at the time of hospital
admission and the need to have this information in a written form that they can take home
at discharge. They also stressed the importance of information about their medical care
and what to expect after discharge, including common symptoms, possible complications
and where they can get advice and support.

 
The committee used their experience to agree topics that should be included, as a
minimum, in the information given. They highlighted the importance of ease of access to
information for people throughout their care pathway.
In the committee's experience, some people want information about the risk of recurrence
of subarachnoid haemorrhage and some do not. They agreed that discussions should
include the effect of individual variables on the person's risk of recurrence. The committee
discussed the lack of a validated risk tool to inform estimates of individual risk and made a
recommendation for research on a risk stratification tool to estimate risk of recurrence.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The content, delivery and quality of information given to people with aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage varies widely. The recommendations are expected to
encourage discussion that is tailored to the person's preferences.
Return to recommendations

 
Context
Subarachnoid haemorrhage is a bleed into the fluid-filled subarachnoid space around the
brain and spinal cord. Spontaneous subarachnoid haemorrhage accounts for 5% of all
strokes and is estimated to occur in 2 to 20 people per 100,000 per year. In around 80% of
people, the bleed arises from rupture of an intracranial arterial aneurysm. Aneurysmal
subarachnoid haemorrhage is slightly more common in women than men, and can occur
across a wide range of ages with a median age at presentation between 50 and 60.
The main symptom of subarachnoid haemorrhage is a sudden and severe 'thunderclap'
headache but there may also be neck stiffness, altered consciousness or seizures. The
condition is more easily diagnosed in people presenting with severe symptoms,
unconsciousness or sudden onset acute headache but some people with subarachnoid
haemorrhage present with less severe or non-specific symptoms and signs. A high index
of suspicion and holistic clinical assessment are therefore required to avoid missed
diagnoses.
Urgent investigation to confirm a diagnosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage facilitates
treatment to prevent rebleeding from the ruptured aneurysm and reduces disability and
death. Although outcomes for people with subarachnoid haemorrhage have slowly
improved, the risk of death remains high and those who survive are often severely
disabled. This guideline aims to improve the speed and accuracy of diagnosis and the
effectiveness of treatment. It provides recommendations based on current evidence
covering initial assessment, diagnostic investigations, treatment options, management of
complications and follow-up care. It also identifies areas where evidence is lacking and
recommends research to help inform future guidance.