Ticagrelor for preventing atherothrombotic events after myocardial infarction
1 Recommendations
1.1 Ticagrelor, in combination with aspirin, is recommended within its marketing
authorisation as an option for preventing atherothrombotic events in adults who
had a myocardial infarction and who are at high risk of a further event.
Treatment should be stopped when clinically indicated or at a maximum of
3 years.

 
2 The technology
Summary of ticagrelor
Ticagrelor (Brilique, AstraZeneca) is an oral antagonist of the P2Y12
Description of
the adenosine diphosphate receptor that inhibits platelet aggregation and
technology
thrombus formation in atherosclerotic disease.
Ticagrelor 60 mg twice daily, co-administered with aspirin (acetylsalicylic
acid), has a marketing authorisation for 'the prevention of atherothrombotic
events in adult patients with a history of myocardial infarction of at least
1 year and a high risk of developing an atherothrombotic event'.
The marketing authorisation for preventing atherothrombotic events in
Marketing
authorisation adults with a history of myocardial infarction and a high risk of an
atherothrombotic event was granted in February 2016.
NICE's technology appraisal guidance on ticagrelor for the treatment of
acute coronary syndromes covers ticagrelor 90 mg and aspirin for
preventing atherothrombotic events.
Ticagrelor is contraindicated in patients with active pathological bleeding, a
history of intracranial haemorrhage, or severe hepatic impairment.
Co-administration of ticagrelor with a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor (for example,
ketoconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir or atazanavir) is also
Adverse
reactions contraindicated. The most commonly reported adverse effects include
dyspnoea, epistaxis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, subcutaneous or dermal
bleeding, and bruising. For full details of adverse reactions and
contraindications, see the summary of product characteristics.

 
Ticagrelor 60 mg twice daily is the recommended dose when extended
treatment is needed for patients with a history of myocardial infarction of at
least 1 year and a high risk of an atherothrombotic event. Treatment may be
started without interruption (continuation therapy) after the initial 1-year
treatment with ticagrelor 90 mg or other adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
receptor inhibitor therapy in patients with acute coronary syndromes and
Recommended
with a high risk of an atherothrombotic event. Treatment can also be started
dose and
schedule up to 2 years from the myocardial infarction, or within 1 year after stopping
previous ADP receptor inhibitor treatment.
Unless contraindicated, ticagrelor should always be given with a daily low
maintenance dose of aspirin 75 mg to 150 mg.
There are limited data on the efficacy and safety of ticagrelor beyond
3 years of extended treatment.
Ticagrelor costs £54.60 for a 56-tablet pack (28 days' supply). Costs may
Price
vary in different settings because of negotiated procurement discounts.

 
3 Evidence
The appraisal committee considered evidence submitted by AstraZeneca and a review of
this submission by the evidence review group. See the committee papers for full details of
the evidence.

 
4 Committee discussion
The appraisal committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost effectiveness
of extended therapy with ticagrelor 60 mg twice daily plus aspirin (hereafter referred to as
ticagrelor), having considered evidence on the nature of preventing atherothrombotic
events in people with a history of myocardial infarction and at high risk of
atherothrombotic events, and the value placed on the benefits of ticagrelor by people with
the condition, those who represent them, and clinical experts. It also took into account the
effective use of NHS resources.
Nature of the treatment and patient perspective
4.1 The committee heard from the clinical expert and patient experts that a history of
a myocardial infarction causes considerable anxiety, particularly about having
further myocardial infarctions or other cardiovascular events such as a stroke.
People also have concerns about the risk of bleeding associated with antiplatelet
therapy, particularly with extended treatment. The fear of a bleed increases over
time and can have a negative impact on the quality of life of the person and their
family. The committee concluded that an additional antiplatelet agent to reduce
the risk of further cardiovascular events would be useful, but that any additional
bleeding risk associated with extended treatment should be taken into account
when deciding whether to continue a person's antiplatelet treatment.
Clinical management
4.2 The committee understood that ticagrelor is a therapy to prevent further
atherothrombotic events after treatment of the acute coronary syndrome has
stopped. It therefore briefly discussed the clinical management of acute coronary
syndromes. It was aware of NICE's technology appraisal guidance on ticagrelor
for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes and prasugrel with percutaneous
coronary intervention for treating acute coronary syndromes, as well as the NICE
guidelines on myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation: acute
management and unstable angina and NSTEMI: early management. The clinical
experts explained that practice varies across the NHS and although clopidogrel

 
plus aspirin has been the most commonly used treatment for acute coronary
syndromes, the use of newer therapies such as prasugrel and ticagrelor (each as
dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin) is increasing.
4.3 The committee considered how treatment with ticagrelor would fit into the clinical
pathway for preventing a myocardial infarction. The committee was aware that
patients enrolled into PEGASUS-TIMI 54, the trial which formed the basis of the
company submission, had a history of myocardial infarction occurring between
12 and 36 months before entry. Patients also had at least 1 additional risk factor
for subsequent atherothrombotic events, listed in the summary of product
characteristics as age 65 or over, diabetes mellitus needing medication, a second
prior myocardial infarction, evidence of multivessel coronary artery disease, or
chronic non-end-stage renal dysfunction. In the trial, treatment with a previous
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor could have been stopped any time before
randomisation to the treatment arms. The committee was also aware that 84% of
patients in each treatment arm received clopidogrel plus aspirin as their previous
antiplatelet therapy and, therefore, had switched from clopidogrel (as their first-
line therapy) to ticagrelor. The committee heard from clinical experts that
switching between treatments occurs in clinical practice and is not as much of a
concern as having a gap between treatments. The clinical experts clarified that
when there is a gap in therapy, the risk of an atherothrombotic event increases,
particularly in people at high risk. Therefore any gap in therapy should be
minimised whenever possible. The committee considered whether ticagrelor
would only be used as continuation therapy, but noted from consultation
comments that this would not always be possible if, for example, a person had
stopped their first-line therapy because of an adverse reaction within 1 year of
their myocardial infarction (that is, before ticagrelor 60 mg is indicated). Based on
comments from clinical experts and those received during consultation, the
committee concluded that patients and clinicians would value ticagrelor either as
continuation therapy after their first year of treatment, or when first-line dual
antiplatelet therapy has been used but stopped for less than 1 year.
Decision problem: population
4.4 The committee was aware that the population in the company's decision
problem, and therefore the focus of the company's submission, was adults who

 
had a myocardial infarction between 1 and 2 years ago who are at increased risk
of an atherothrombotic event (referred to by the company as its base-case
population). The committee noted that the company had defined a narrower
population than that in NICE's scope, that is, adults who have had a myocardial
infarction and are at increased risk of atherothrombotic events. The committee
was aware that the company's rationale for the narrower population was that the
marketing authorisation focuses on those patients for whom the adverse effect
profile was most favourable in PEGASUS-TIMI 54. The marketing authorisation
allows ticagrelor to be started in patients 1 to 2 years after a myocardial infarction
or within 1 year of stopping treatment with a previous antiplatelet therapy. Based
on clinical practice in England, the company suggested that few patients would
have stopped antiplatelet therapy within 1 year. However, the committee noted
comments received during consultation that the full population covered by the
marketing authorisation should be included in the committee's discussions; that
is, not only people who had a myocardial infarction 1 to 2 years ago, but also
people who had a myocardial infarction more than 2 years ago and stopped
taking antiplatelet therapy no more than 1 year ago. The committee considered
that because this latter group is covered by the marketing authorisation, and
given comments that ticagrelor would be valued as an option for these people, it
should include this group. The committee further concluded that although there
may be only a minority of patients in this position, it was not appropriate to
exclude these people in decision-making.
Decision problem: comparator
4.5 The committee noted that the final scope specified clopidogrel plus aspirin and
aspirin alone as comparators and that the company considered aspirin alone to
be the appropriate comparator. The committee understood that the company did
not consider clopidogrel plus aspirin to be an appropriate comparator because it
does not have a marketing authorisation for use more than 12 months after a
myocardial infarction and is not considered established clinical practice at that
point in the treatment pathway. The committee recognised that although the
company did not consider clopidogrel plus aspirin to be an appropriate
comparator, it had considered doing an indirect comparison of ticagrelor with
clopidogrel plus aspirin because there were no trials directly comparing the
2 treatments. But the company considered this inappropriate (as did the evidence

 
review group; ERG) because of differences in the design of the trials and the
patient populations included in the indirect comparison. The committee
understood from the clinical experts that clopidogrel plus aspirin was commonly
used as an initial antiplatelet agent for up to 12 months after a myocardial
infarction. However it is not used in clinical practice when continued treatment is
needed for patients with a history of myocardial infarction and a high risk of an
atherothrombotic event, that is, at the same point in the treatment pathway
where the summary of product characteristics recommends ticagrelor (see
section 4.3). The committee concluded that clopidogrel plus aspirin was not an
appropriate comparator and that the most appropriate comparison for its
decision-making was ticagrelor compared with aspirin alone.
Clinical effectiveness
PEGASUS-TIMI 54
4.6 The company presented clinical effectiveness results for the PEGASUS-TIMI 54
trial whole population who had ticagrelor compared with placebo (ticagrelor
n=7,045, placebo n=7,067). The marketing authorisation for ticagrelor as an
extended therapy was based on prespecified subgroup analyses. The committee
noted that the company presented a prespecified subgroup analysis of patients
who had a myocardial infarction 1 to 2 years previously (ticagrelor n=4,331,
placebo n=4,333). The committee also noted that these results (referred to as
the 'base-case' population by the company) tended to be more favourable to
ticagrelor than the results from the overall ticagrelor population. The committee
acknowledged that PEGASUS-TIMI 54 was not statistically powered to detect a
difference in outcomes in the company's base-case population, but agreed that
because of the size of the subgroup, and the baseline characteristics being
sufficiently similar to the overall ticagrelor group, it was appropriate for it to focus
on this subgroup analysis in its decision-making about the clinical effectiveness
of ticagrelor.
4.7 The committee considered the effectiveness of ticagrelor compared with placebo
in the subgroup of patients from PEGASUS-TIMI 54 who had a myocardial
infarction between 1 and 2 years ago. The committee noted that ticagrelor

 
reduced the risk of myocardial infarction, stroke or death from cardiovascular
causes by 23% compared with placebo. The committee concluded that treatment
with ticagrelor is clinically effective for people with a history of myocardial
infarction and a high risk of an atherothrombotic event.
4.8 The committee heard contrasting views from the clinical and patient experts on
the length of treatment with ticagrelor. Based on the progressive disease process
that causes an atherothrombotic event, continued therapy may be justified.
However, the committee was persuaded that the risk of bleeding was substantial
and that prescribing should be informed by the evidence. The committee
understood that the mean length of treatment in PEGASUS-TIMI 54 was
25.3 months, and that the ticagrelor marketing authorisation states that there are
limited data on its efficacy and safety beyond 3 years of treatment with
ticagrelor. The committee concluded that it could only consider a maximum
duration of treatment of up to 3 years, in line with the evidence presented for
ticagrelor.
Cost effectiveness
4.9 The committee considered the cost effectiveness of ticagrelor for preventing
atherothrombotic events after myocardial infarction. It noted that the company's
economic model was based on data for secondary efficacy outcomes in
PEGASUS-TIMI 54, including first and subsequent events, hospitalisations,
dyspnoea, bleeds, EQ-5D responses and treatment discontinuations. The
committee considered whether PEGASUS-TIMI 54 was underpowered to analyse
these data. It was persuaded by the clinical and health economic experts that
using these outcomes was acceptable because the population was large, so the
numbers of patients on whom the secondary outcomes were based were likely to
generate reasonable estimates. In addition, the committee understood that the
model used equations to calculate the risk of an event occurring and that the
company had used the intention-to-treat population for calculating these. The
ERG confirmed the company's view that the risk equations were likely to be
conservative and would, therefore, be unfavourable to ticagrelor. The committee
concluded that the company's incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were
likely to be overestimates because the parameters used to derive them were for
the intention-to-treat population and therefore likely to underestimate the effect

 
of ticagrelor.
4.10 The committee considered the most plausible ICER on which to base its decision.
It considered the company's deterministic base-case estimate of £20,636, which
incorporated some minor amendments suggested by the ERG. It also considered
the ERG's exploratory preferred base case of £24,711, which incorporated small
changes to parameters including the cost and disutility associated with gout,
adjusted health care costs, uncertainty around NHS reference costs and disutility
for major bleeds. The committee was further reassured that when the ERG
conducted scenario analysis, only one scenario resulted in an ICER above
£30,000 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained. This scenario was
considered to be implausible because it held treatment efficacy constant while
assuming that all patients who did not die or have a non-fatal event incurred
3-year treatment costs, whereas the actual time on treatment for patients in the
study who did not die or have a non-fatal event was less than 3 years. The
committee concluded that all the estimates were within a range considered to be
a cost-effective use of NHS resources (£20,000 to £30,000 per QALY gained)
and that it could recommend treatment with ticagrelor in line with its marketing
authorisation. The committee agreed that, although the ICERs presented did not
include the people at high risk who had a myocardial infarction more than 2 years
ago and whose antiplatelet therapy had been stopped less than 1 year ago, the
recommendation should cover this group.
4.11 The committee recognised that all the cost-effectiveness evidence assumed a
maximum treatment length of 3 years. It understood that some clinicians and
patients may want to continue treatment indefinitely, but that the costs and
clinical benefits of doing so had not been presented. The committee therefore
concluded that the positive recommendation should only be for the length of time
for which evidence had been presented, specifically 3 years.
Pharmaceutical Price Regulation Scheme (PPRS)
2014
4.12 The committee was aware of NICE's position statement on the Pharmaceutical
Price Regulation Scheme (PPRS) 2014, and in particular the PPRS payment

 
mechanism. It accepted the conclusion 'that the 2014 PPRS payment mechanism
should not, as a matter of course, be regarded as a relevant consideration in its
assessment of the cost effectiveness of branded medicines'. The committee
heard nothing to suggest that there is any basis for taking a different view about
the relevance of the PPRS to this appraisal. It therefore concluded that the PPRS
payment mechanism was not relevant in considering the cost effectiveness of the
technology in this appraisal.

 
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7(6) of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning groups, NHS England and, with
respect to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this appraisal within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh Assembly Minister for Health and Social Services has issued directions
to the NHS in Wales on implementing NICE technology appraisal guidance. When
a NICE technology appraisal recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other
technology, the NHS in Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it
within 3 months of the guidance being published.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
person has a history of myocardial infarction and a high risk of an
atherothrombotic event and the doctor responsible for their care thinks that
ticagrelor 60 mg plus aspirin is the right treatment, it should be available for use,
in line with NICE's recommendations.