Totally endoscopic robotically assisted coronary artery bypass grafting 
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of totally endoscopic robotically
assisted coronary artery bypass grafting does not appear adequate for this
procedure to be used without special arrangements for consent and for audit or
research.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to undertake totally endoscopic robotically assisted coronary
artery bypass grafting should take the following actions.
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their Trusts.
• Ensure that patients understand the uncertainty about the procedure's safety
and efficacy and provide them with clear written information. Use of NICE's
information for the public is recommended.
• Enter all patients having totally endoscopic robotically assisted coronary
artery bypass grafting onto the National Institute for Cardiovascular
Outcomes Research's National Congenital Heart Disease Audit Database.
Contact bartshealth.nicor-generalenquiries@nhs.net for details.
1.3 Publication of safety and efficacy outcomes will be useful. NICE may review the
procedure upon publication of further evidence.

 
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 In coronary artery disease, plaque deposits on the inner walls of the coronary
arteries lead to narrowing or occlusion, and subsequently decreased oxygen
supply to the heart. This may cause angina or myocardial infarction, and long-
term weakening of the heart muscle leading to heart failure or arrhythmia.
2.1.2 The aim of a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) is to increase the flow of blood
to the heart by inserting grafts to bypass narrowed or obstructed coronary
arteries.
2.1.3 CABG is usually performed with open surgery through a sternotomy. Less
invasive approaches avoiding sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass and general
anaesthesia have been developed, using either left anterior small thoracotomy
(LAST), regional anaesthesia or catheter-based intervention.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Totally endoscopic robotically assisted coronary artery bypass (TECAB) systems
vary, but they generally include a surgeon's viewing and control console with
display system. Remote-control handles control robotic arms that position and
precisely manoeuvre an endoscope and endoscopic instruments within the
patient. Some equipment uses voice-controlled robotic arms.
2.2.2 Following deflation of the lung, small port incisions are made in three intercostal
spaces through which one robotic arm carrying the endoscope and two arms
with surgical implement attachments are introduced. Grafts are harvested from
suitable donor sites, and are used to bypass one or more diseased coronary
arteries.
2.2.3 TECAB treatment of the beating heart is carried out using a stabilisation device
consisting of two branches that immobilise the site for anastomosis while the
heart continues to beat. This removes the need for cardiopulmonary bypass. The

 
stabilisation device is introduced into the chest through an additional port
incision.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 Fully patent grafts were achieved in 95% (21 of 22) of patients when assessed at
3 months by postoperative angiography, together with good functional results.
2.3.2 Most case series used duration of operation as a measure and this varied
according to the type of procedure undertaken and the number of vessels
bypassed. In 45 consecutive patients undergoing TECAB, the mean operating
time was 4 hours 12 minutes for single vessel surgery and 6 hours 18 minutes for
multiple vessel surgery. In 35 patients, including 8 in whom the procedure was
performed on the beating heart, the operating time ranged from 3 hours
30 minutes to 8 hours (mean 5 hours 47 minutes). In a further 37 patients (29 of
whom had the beating heart procedure), the mean operating time for the early
cases in the series was 4 hours 40 minutes, but this was reduced to 3 hours
6 minutes following the introduction of endoscopic stabilisation. The mean length
of stay in an intensive care unit varied from 14 hours to 74 hours, and the mean
total length of hospital stay ranged from 5.0 to 15.4 days. The upper limits for
length of stay were following multiple vessel surgery. For more details, refer to
the sources of evidence.
2.3.3 The specialist advisors noted that bleeding could potentially make vessel
identification difficult. They also noted that patency rates of coronary bypass
grafts were not sufficiently well documented.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 Conversion rates to open procedures (either mini-thoracotomy or full sternotomy)
were reported in all case series and ranged from 19% (5 of 27) to 51% (19 of 37)
of procedures initiated as TECAB.
2.4.2 There were no cases of operative mortality associated with the TECAB procedure

 
(n=142).
2.4.3 In a case series of 45 patients, operative complications included port access
failure in 7% (3 of 45) of patients, prolonged cross clamp time in 9% (4 of 45),
myocardial infarction in 2% (1 of 45), hypoxic brain damage in 2% (1 of 45) and
internal thoracic artery injury in 2% (1 of 45) of patients.
2.4.4 In a series of 45 patients, 4% (2 of 45) needed secondary intervention because of
bleeding from the site of anastomosis. There were no cases of wound infection at
the port site throughout the series. For more details, refer to the sources of
evidence.
2.4.5 The specialist advisors noted theoretical complications as myocardial infarction,
pneumothorax, cardiac tamponade and fatal haemorrhage. They also noted that
there is potential for stenosis or occlusion at the site of anastomosis.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 There are a number of other procedures for treating patients with coronary artery
disease, but no good studies have been found that compare these with TECAB.