VA ECMO for severe acute heart failure in adults
1 Recommendations
As a bridge to recovery, heart transplant or
implanted LVAD
1.1 Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) can be used as
an option for severe acute heart failure in adults as a bridge to recovery, a heart
transplant or an implanted left ventricular assist device (LVAD).
When the potential for functional recovery is low
or uncertain, and a heart transplant or implanted
LVAD is unsuitable
1.2 More research is needed on VA ECMO for severe acute heart failure in adults
when the potential for functional recovery is low or uncertain, and a heart
transplant or an implanted LVAD is unsuitable, before it can be used in the NHS.
1.3 This procedure should only be done as part of formal research and an NHS
research ethics committee needs to have approved its use.

 
What this means in practice
As a bridge to recovery, a heart transplant or an implanted LVAD
There is enough evidence on the safety and efficacy of this procedure for healthcare
professionals to consider VA ECMO as an option as a bridge to recovery, a heart
transplant or an implanted LVAD.
Healthcare professionals should discuss the available options with the person with
severe acute heart failure (and their family members and carers as appropriate)
before a joint decision is made, if possible (see NICE's page on shared decision
making).
Hospital trusts will have their own policies on funding procedures and monitoring
results. NHS England may also have policies on funding of procedures.
When the potential for functional recovery is low or uncertain, and a heart
transplant or an implanted LVAD is unsuitable
There is not enough evidence to know if this procedure is efficacious when the
potential for functional recovery is low or uncertain, and a heart transplant or an
implanted LVAD is unsuitable. VA ECMO should only be done as part of formal
research in this group.
For everyone having the procedure
Auditing of outcomes
Healthcare professionals doing this procedure should collect data on safety and
outcomes of the procedure. Enter details about everyone having this procedure into
the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization Registry and regularly review the data
on outcomes and safety. Healthcare professionals are also encouraged to enter data
into the cardiogenic shock module in the Intensive Care National Audit and Research
Centre Case Mix Programme.
Who should be involved in the procedure

 
Patient selection should be done by a multidisciplinary team. The procedure could be
done in centres specialising in managing severe acute heart failure and by healthcare
professionals with specific training in this procedure.
What research is needed
More research is needed on:
• patient selection including:
－ age
－ comorbidities
－ cause of severe acute heart failure
－ predictors of recovery
• short- and long-term outcomes.
Why the committee made these recommendations
VA ECMO is not a treatment for severe acute heart failure. It is a short-term intervention
that provides oxygenated blood to organs while a person's heart recovers, or before
someone has a heart transplant or an implanted LVAD.
The prognosis for severe acute heart failure can depend on its causes, so recovery is more
likely in some people, such as people with reversible causes. Evidence suggests that
VA ECMO improves survival in these people while they recover, or before they have a heart
transplant or an implanted LVAD.
For people with a low or uncertain chance of functional recovery who cannot have a heart
transplant or an implanted LVAD, clinical trial evidence suggests that there is no benefit
from VA ECMO. This may be because of the cause of their severe acute heart failure or
because of their comorbidities. For this group, more research is needed on who might
benefit from VA ECMO, so it should only be used in research.

 
2 Information about the procedure
2.1 Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) can be used for
adults with severe acute heart failure as a bridge to recovery, or to having a heart
transplant or an implanted left ventricular assist device.
2.2 In VA ECMO, blood is taken from the venous system (usually from the femoral
vein or directly from the right atrium) and pumped through an oxygenator, where
oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged. It is then returned to the arterial
system, usually through the femoral or axillary artery, or the ascending aorta.
People are usually given a continuous infusion of an anticoagulant, usually
heparin, to prevent blood clotting in the extracorporeal system. For people with
poor kidney function, a haemofiltration unit may be added to the circuit.
3 Committee discussion
The condition
3.1 Acute heart failure is a complex clinical syndrome of symptoms and signs that
happen when the efficiency of the heart as a pump is impaired. It can lead to
reduced blood flow to the body and increased filling pressures in the heart.
Cardiogenic shock is the most severe form of acute heart failure, with short-term
mortality between 30% and 50%. It can be caused by a heart attack, heart failure,
inflammation of the heart muscle, drug overdoses and poisoning, and blood clots
in the lungs. Severe acute heart failure in pregnancy is relatively uncommon but
rates are increasing, particularly in the postpartum period.
Current practice
3.2 NICE has published recommendations on diagnosing and managing acute heart
failure (see NICE's guideline on acute heart failure: diagnosis and management).
Acute heart failure includes sudden significant deterioration in people with known
cardiac dysfunction or the new onset of symptoms in people without previous

 
cardiac dysfunction. Treatment involves medicines, including diuretics and
inotropes, and invasive treatments such as:
• electrophysiological interventions such as pacemakers or implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators
• revascularisation procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention,
valve replacement or repair
• temporary use of intra-aortic balloon pumps or ventricular assist devices.
Most acute heart failure can be managed with conventional treatment. Only a
few people with severe acute heart failure will need venoarterial
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO).
Unmet need
3.3 VA ECMO is a form of extracorporeal life support. It provides cardiac and
respiratory support for people with severe acute heart failure that has not
responded to other forms of treatment. VA ECMO is used when people have the
potential to recover, or as a bridge to having a heart transplant or an implanted
left ventricular assist device. Unlike a heart–lung (cardiopulmonary) bypass
machine, it tends to be used for days to weeks, not hours during open heart
surgery. This allows the heart time to recover. The aim is to improve patient
outcomes.
The evidence
3.4 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and a detailed
review of the evidence from 14 sources (16 publications), which was discussed
by the committee. The evidence included 7 systematic reviews, 3 randomised
controlled trials, 1 retrospective registry study, 2 single centre retrospective
studies, and 1 review and case series. It is presented in the summary of key
evidence section in the interventional procedures overview. Other relevant

 
literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.5 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: survival, restoration of organ function, and bridging to recovery,
transplant or long-term support.
3.6 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: bleeding, leg ischaemia, stroke, infection, kidney failure and circuit-related
complications.
3.7 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.8 VA ECMO could be done in centres specialised in managing severe acute heart
failure and providing VA ECMO.
3.9 This is a short-term intervention to support people and provide a bridge to
further treatment or decisions about their care. Some people will recover, and
others will need a heart transplant or long-term mechanical support.
3.10 The committee was told that, for better outcomes, it is very important to start
VA ECMO for managing severe acute heart failure as early as possible.
3.11 The committee was told that people:
• can be transferred to specialist centres for VA ECMO
• can potentially be transferred on VA ECMO to specialist centres.
3.12 The committee noted that there is a risk of limb ischaemia when the femoral
artery is used. But it also noted that this risk has reduced since distal limb
perfusion has been in use.
3.13 The recommendations in this guidance include the use of VA ECMO during
pregnancy or in the postpartum period.

 
3.14 The committee was told that a high level of nursing expertise and input from a
perfusionist are needed to support people on VA ECMO.
3.15 Some people who had VA ECMO have become organ donors, and their organs
have been transplanted.
Equality considerations
3.16 There are few centres in the UK that specialise in managing severe acute heart
failure and using VA ECMO. So, people in more rural areas may have to travel
large distances or may not have time to access this intervention.
3.17 The prevalence of heart failure slowly increases with age until about 65 years,
and then more quickly. Age is a protected characteristic under the Equality Act
(2010).
3.18 Acute heart failure in pregnancy is relatively uncommon. Women, trans men and
non-binary people who are pregnant are at greater risk of heart failure if they
have:
• established chronic conditions such as diabetes or hypertension, or
• congenital or acquired heart disease.
Pregnancy and maternity are protected characteristics under the Equality Act
(2010). Women, trans men and non-binary people with severe acute heart
failure who are pregnant, or who have recently been pregnant, may need to
access this intervention.