Varicose veins in the legs
Quality statements
Statement 1 People with varicose veins that are causing symptoms or complications
(including ulceration) are referred to a vascular service.
Statement 2 People with varicose veins who are seen by a vascular service are assessed
with duplex ultrasound.
Statement 3 People with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux are offered a suitable
treatment in this order: endothermal ablation, ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy,
surgery, compression hosiery.

 
Quality statement 1: Referral to a vascular
service
Quality statement
People with varicose veins that are causing symptoms or complications (including
ulceration) are referred to a vascular service.
Rationale
If left untreated, varicose veins will continue to cause symptoms that affect quality of life,
and may progress to bleeding, skin damage and ulceration. Referral to a vascular service is
a first step to interventional treatment for varicose veins that can relieve symptoms, and
slow disease progression and improve people's quality of life.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Structure
Evidence of local arrangements and written referral criteria to ensure that people with
varicose veins that are causing symptoms or complications (including ulceration) are
referred to a vascular service.
Data source: Local data collection.
Process
Proportion of people with varicose veins that are causing symptoms or complications
(including ulceration) who are referred to a vascular service.

 
Numerator – the number in the denominator who are referred to a vascular service.
Denominator – the number of people who present with varicose veins that are causing
symptoms or complications (including ulceration).
Data source: Local data collection.
Outcome
Progression of venous leg disease.
Data source: Local data collection.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as GPs and vascular services) ensure that local referral pathways
into vascular services are consistent with the evidence-based referral criteria in NICE's
guideline on varicose veins, which include varicose veins that are causing symptoms or
complications (including ulceration).
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs) follow local referral pathways into vascular
services to ensure that people with varicose veins that are causing symptoms or
complications (including ulceration) are referred to a vascular service.
Commissioners monitor activity across local referral pathways to ensure that the
evidence-based referral criteria in NICE's guideline on varicose veins are being followed.
People with varicose veins that are causing symptoms (for example pain, aching,
discomfort, swelling, heaviness and itching) or problems such as bleeding, eczema or
leg ulcers are referred to a specialist vascular service (a team of healthcare professionals
who have training and experience in diagnosing and treating varicose veins).
Source guidance
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline CG168 (2013),
recommendation 1.2.2 (key priority for implementation)

 
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Symptoms of varicose veins
Symptoms of varicose veins include troublesome lower limb symptoms (typically pain,
aching, discomfort, swelling, heaviness and itching). The symptoms may be associated
with primary or recurrent varicose veins. [Adapted from NICE's guideline on varicose veins,
recommendation 1.2.2]
Complications of varicose veins
Complications of varicose veins are:
• lower-limb skin changes, such as pigmentation or eczema, thought to be caused by
chronic venous insufficiency
• bleeding varicose veins
• superficial vein thrombosis (characterised by the appearance of hard, painful veins)
and suspected venous incompetence
• a venous leg ulcer (a break in the skin below the knee that has not healed within
2 weeks) or a healed venous leg ulcer.
[Adapted from NICE's guideline on varicose veins, recommendation 1.2.2]
Vascular service
A vascular service is a team of healthcare professionals who have the skills to undertake a
full clinical and duplex ultrasound assessment and provide a full range of treatment.
[NICE's guideline on varicose veins, recommendation 1.2.1]

 
Quality statement 2: Duplex ultrasound
Quality statement
People with varicose veins who are seen by a vascular service are assessed with duplex
ultrasound.
Rationale
Duplex ultrasound is a non-invasive scan used to image the blood vessels of the body. It
provides detailed information that helps to confirm the diagnosis and pattern of venous
disease and determine the most appropriate treatment option. The handheld doppler is
still used in some services, but it is outdated and does not provide the detailed, accurate
information produced by duplex ultrasound.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Structure
Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people with varicose veins seen by a
vascular service are assessed with duplex ultrasound.
Data source: Local data collection.
Process
Proportion of people with varicose veins seen by a vascular service who are assessed with
duplex ultrasound.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who are assessed with duplex ultrasound.

 
Denominator – the number of people with varicose veins seen by a vascular service.
Data source: Local data collection.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (secondary care) ensure that vascular services have adequate numbers
of duplex ultrasound machines and that staff have undergone appropriate training, so that
all people with varicose veins referred to a vascular service are assessed with duplex
ultrasound.
Healthcare professionals working in a vascular service ensure that people with varicose
veins are assessed with duplex ultrasound.
Commissioners ensure that they commission vascular services that have sufficient
capacity, equipment and skilled staff to assess varicose veins using duplex ultrasound.
People with varicose veins who have been referred to a vascular service have a duplex
ultrasound scan (a scan that uses high-frequency sound waves to produce a picture of the
veins). The scan shows the blood flow and helps the vascular service team locate any
damaged valves that might be causing the varicose veins.
Source guidance
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline CG168 (2013),
recommendation 1.3.1 (key priority for implementation)
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Vascular service
A vascular service is a team of healthcare professionals who have the skills to undertake a
full clinical and duplex ultrasound assessment and provide a full range of treatment.
[NICE's guideline on varicose veins, recommendation 1.2.1]

 
Duplex ultrasound
A device utilising doppler ultrasound that permits colour-coded visualisation of blood flow
in the superficial, perforating and deep veins, as well as grey-scale imaging of the veins
and surrounding tissue. It can also be used to image blood flow in arteries. [NICE's full
guideline on varicose veins, glossary]

 
Quality statement 3: Treatment of
varicose veins
Quality statement
People with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux are offered a suitable treatment in
this order: endothermal ablation, ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy, surgery,
compression hosiery.
Rationale
Historically surgery and compression therapy were the only treatments available to people
with varicose veins, but in recent years other treatments including endothermal ablation
and ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy have been developed. These newer therapies
are less invasive than surgery, promote faster recovery and need shorter hospital stays.
Not all treatments are suitable for all people and therefore it is important that the person's
needs and preferences are also considered when deciding which is the most suitable
treatment.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Structure
Evidence of local arrangements that the full range of treatments for varicose veins is
commissioned in accordance with NICE's guideline on varicose veins.
Data source: Local data collection.

 
Process
a) Proportion of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux suitable for
endothermal ablation who are offered endothermal ablation.
Numerator – the number in the denominator offered endothermal ablation.
Denominator – the number of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux
suitable for endothermal ablation.
Data source: Local data collection.
b) Proportion of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux unsuitable for
endothermal ablation who are offered ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy.
Numerator – the number in the denominator offered ultrasound-guided foam
sclerotherapy.
Denominator – the number of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux
unsuitable for endothermal ablation, but suitable for ultrasound-guided foam
sclerotherapy.
Data source: Local data collection.
c) Proportion of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux unsuitable for
endothermal ablation and ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy who are offered surgery.
Numerator – the number in the denominator offered surgery.
Denominator – the number of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux
unsuitable for endothermal ablation and ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy, but
suitable for surgery.
Data source: Local data collection.
d) Proportion of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux unsuitable for
endothermal ablation, ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy and surgery who are offered
compression hosiery.

 
Numerator – the number in the denominator offered compression hosiery.
Denominator – the number of people with confirmed varicose veins and truncal reflux
unsuitable for endothermal ablation, ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy and surgery.
Data source: Local data collection.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (secondary care) ensure that the local treatment pathway is consistent
with the evidence-based treatment order in NICE's guideline on varicose veins.
Healthcare professionals ensure that they follow the local treatment pathway to offer
people a treatment that is consistent with the evidence-based treatment order in NICE's
guideline on varicose veins.
Commissioners ensure that the full range of treatments for varicose veins is
commissioned in accordance with NICE's guideline on varicose veins.
People with varicose veins caused by problems with the blood flow in the leg are offered
treatment with:
• endothermal ablation (in which the veins are closed off using heat)
• or, if endothermal ablation is unsuitable, a treatment called ultrasound-guided foam
sclerotherapy (in which the veins are closed off using a chemical foam)
• or, if both endothermal ablation and ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy are
unsuitable, surgery to remove the varicose veins.
They should only be offered compression hosiery (stockings designed to improve blood
flow by squeezing the legs) as a permanent treatment if none of the other treatments are
suitable for them.
Source guidance
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline CG168 (2013),

 
recommendations 1.3.2 and 1.3.4 (key priority for implementation)
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Suitable treatment order
Endothermal ablation, ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy or surgery may be offered in
that order, according to suitability. It recommends compression hosiery only if those 3
interventions are unsuitable for the person. The suitability of each option will depend on
the person's clinical circumstances and their preferences. [Adapted from NICE's guideline
on varicose veins]
Truncal reflux
Truncal reflux is the failure of competence of valves in 1 or more of the 3 truncal veins –
the great saphenous vein, the small saphenous vein and the anterior accessory saphenous

definition of reflux]
Endothermal ablation
There are 2 types of endothermal ablation in common use: radiofrequency ablation and
laser ablation (see NICE's interventional procedures guidance on radiofrequency ablation
of varicose veins and endovenous laser treatment of the long saphenous vein).
Radiofrequency ablation uses radio wave electromagnetic energy to cause venous ablation
and closure by raising the temperature of the inner lumen of the vein. Laser ablation uses
laser energy to cause venous ablation and closure by raising the temperature of the inner
lumen of the vein. [Adapted from NICE's full guideline on varicose veins, glossary
definitions of radiofrequency ablation and laser ablation]
Ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy
The injection of a sclerosing agent into a vein for chemical ablation guided by real-time
ultrasound imaging (see NICE's interventional procedure guidance on ultrasound-guided
foam sclerotherapy for varicose veins). [NICE's full guideline on varicose veins, glossary
definition of ultrasound guided foam sclerotherapy]

 
Surgery
A surgical technique of truncal or tributary vein removal, in which the vein is physically
stripped from surrounding tissues and removed. [NICE's full guideline on varicose veins,
glossary definition of stripping]
Compression hosiery
Graduated elastic stockings work by compressing the varicose veins, so emptying them of
blood and by increasing the venous return, both of which reduce venous pressure. They
can be bought 'off the shelf' in different sizes or they can be made to measure and are
available in different pressures. [Adapted from NICE's full guideline on varicose veins,
glossary definition of compression hosiery]
Reflux
Reflux is the backflow of blood through a venous valve. [NICE's full guideline on varicose
veins, glossary definition of stripping]