An elderly patient experienced a week of shortness of breath on exertion, with acute worsening including near syncope and severe fatigue. She called EMS, who recorded an ECG on the way to the hospital.

On arrival at the Emergency Department, she appeared critically ill, with severe hypotension but was alert and oriented and able to follow commands.

There is sinus rhythm at around 100 bpm. The QRS morphology alternates between two morphologies. The P waves are regular, the PR intervals are similar, and the QRS duration is similar throughout. This is electrical alternans.

Initial ED ECG

The long lead II rhythm strip shows a rapid sinus rhythm at ~90–95/minute, with a narrow QRS complex and alternating QRS morphology every other beat.

P wave morphology and the PR interval do not change throughout the tracing, which argues against intermittent preexcitation or late-cycle premature junctional or ventricular beats.

T wave morphology does not change from beat to beat, which argues against intermittent bundle branch block.

Each even-numbered beat manifests decreased R wave amplitude with a prominent J-wave that is not present in odd-numbered beats.

There is a pendulum-like movement from the peak of the QRS from one odd-numbered beat to the next.

Low voltage is present, most marked for even-numbered beats in the limb leads.

Prior ECG (months earlier)

No electrical alternans was present.

Diagnostic Findings

A bedside echocardiogram revealed a large pericardial effusion, with tamponade physiology confirmed clinically and ultrasonographically.

An emergent pericardiocentesis was performed in the cath lab, with 700 cc of fluid removed, resulting in immediate improvement in hemodynamics.

The effusion was felt to be related to the patient’s known cancer.

The patient improved during hospitalization and returned to her previous state of health.

Teaching Commentary and Interpretation

This is a “must know” entity for emergency care providers.

The patient is an elderly woman with a one-week history of worsening dyspnea on exertion, severe fatigue, and near syncope, who was markedly hypotensive and critically ill on ED arrival.

Recognition of the cause of this patient’s acute critical illness should be suspected within one minute of seeing the patient and seeing the ECG.

The alternating QRS morphology represents electrical alternans.

Electrical alternans is frequently misunderstood and often overlooked.

Electrical alternans is most commonly encountered in association with supraventricular tachycardias, especially AVRT and AVNRT, where it may suggest a reentry mechanism.

In this case, the importance of recognizing electrical alternans relates to its association with a large pericardial effusion.

The sensitivity of electrical alternans for smaller pericardial effusions is poor, and even with larger effusions sensitivity is limited.

The likelihood of a large pericardial effusion is increased by the presence of low voltage and pendulum-like variation in QRS amplitude.

Verification of a large pericardial effusion was immediately obtained by bedside echocardiography.

Concern for cardiac tamponade was raised by the patient’s severe dyspnea, near syncope, marked hypotension, and echocardiographic signs of tamponade physiology.

Emergent pericardiocentesis with removal of 700 cc of fluid relieved the patient’s symptoms.

Malignancy is the most common non-traumatic cause of cardiac tamponade.

The pendulum-like variation in QRS amplitude reflects the “swinging heart” pathophysiology seen in large pericardial effusions.