An elderly man with a history of diabetes and hypertension presented with lethargy and weakness, decreased urine output, and hypotension. There was no history of GI bleeding or other hemorrhage, and no fever. He had no chest pain or shortness of breath. It was unknown whether there was a prior history of atrial fibrillation. He was on atenolol, but it was not known whether this was for hypertension or atrial fibrillation. He was not anticoagulated.

Blood pressures ranged from 83/45 to 125/83. Heart rate ranged from 110 to 145.

Initial ECG

There is atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response (approximately 120 bpm). There are aberrantly conducted beats (Ashman phenomenon), which may be confused with PVC couplets. There is ST depression in V2–V6 that is clearly ischemic.

Differential Diagnosis of Ischemia

New or old atrial fibrillation with posterior OMI

New atrial fibrillation with RVR causing demand ischemia

Old atrial fibrillation with poor rate control causing demand ischemia

OMI or ACS causing subendocardial ischemia with possible additional ischemia from atrial fibrillation with RVR

Hemorrhage, dehydration, sepsis, or similar causes resulting in reflexive tachycardia and demand ischemia

PEARL: ST depression maximal in V1–V4 is extremely specific for acute OMI, but not in the presence of atrial fibrillation with RVR.

AI interpretation indicated that in the context of atrial fibrillation with RVR, ST depression in V1–V4 is most likely subendocardial ischemia. This case was not OMI, but rather supply–demand subendocardial ischemia.

Point-of-Care Ultrasound (POCUS)

Assessment of volume status was performed using bedside ultrasound of the inferior vena cava (IVC).

The IVC was collapsing, consistent with volume depletion.

Additional views showed a small right ventricle and a small left ventricle with reasonably good contractility, supporting volume depletion.

The appropriate therapy was fluids and further workup for hemorrhage, dehydration, or sepsis.

Initial Management and Reassessment

Both an esmolol bolus and infusion, and IV fluids were started. Beta blockade should not be given early in a volume-depleted state, as reflexive tachycardia may be necessary to maintain cardiac output.

Lactate was 3.3 mEq/L. Initial troponin I was 0.139 ng/mL. This was felt to represent Type II (demand ischemia) myocardial infarction rather than ACS.

Cardioversion was not performed due to risk of thromboembolism, possible chronic atrial fibrillation, and because atrial fibrillation with RVR was not the primary cause of shock.

Esmolol was stopped and 2 liters of IV fluids were administered.

After fluids, the IVC was less collapsing. No B-lines were present.

Rhythm Conversion and Lewis Leads

The monitor then showed a regular narrow complex tachycardia without visible P-waves, raising the question of SVT versus sinus tachycardia.

Lewis leads were applied by repositioning electrodes:

Right arm electrode on the manubrium

Left arm electrode over the 5th intercostal space at the right sternal border

Left leg electrode over the right lower costal margin

With Lewis leads, P-waves became clearly visible, confirming sinus tachycardia.

Additional fluids were given, and the heart rate decreased. Subsequent ECG was normal.

Hospital Course

Second troponin I: 0.562 ng/mL
Third troponin I: 2.165 ng/mL

The patient developed fever, and urinalysis showed white blood cells. He was treated for urosepsis and improved. He did not have ACS.

Learning Points

Not all myocardial infarction is due to ACS; this was a Type II MI.

Subendocardial supply–demand ischemia in atrial fibrillation with RVR may be maximal in V1–V4.

Atrial fibrillation with RVR may be a consequence, not the cause, of acute illness.

Volume status is critical in the management of atrial fibrillation with RVR.

If the source of supraventricular tachycardia is unclear, Lewis leads should be used.

Additional ECG Interpretation Notes

The initial ECG shows diffuse ST depression with subtle ST elevation in aVR, consistent with diffuse subendocardial ischemia. This pattern suggests severe underlying coronary disease or a non-occlusive systemic cause such as sustained tachycardia, hypotension, shock, sepsis, or anemia.

Mechanisms by which atrial fibrillation may precipitate subendocardial ischemia include loss of atrial kick and shortening of diastolic filling time, particularly in hypovolemia.

Wide “funny-looking beats” in atrial fibrillation may represent either PVCs or aberrantly conducted supraventricular beats (Ashman phenomenon). In this case, treatment was not required, and the abnormal beats resolved with correction of hypovolemia and sepsis.