This was sent by a physician working at a hospital without PCI capabilities and far from one that does, so if there is OMI, thrombolytics are given.

A very elderly patient with previous ejection fraction of 60% complained of shortness of breath for two weeks, with pleuritic chest pain. There was no pain on arrival, but the pain recurred while in the Emergency Department. Blood pressure was 90 systolic.

Initial ECG

The conventional computer interpretation claimed “nonspecific ST abnormality.”

Interpretation: Diagnostic of inferior and right ventricular OMI. Inferior ST elevation and hyperacute T-waves, with reciprocally inverted hyperacute T-wave in aVL. There is minimal ST depression in lead V2, where there should be some ST elevation, which is highly suggestive of posterior OMI.

Hypotension Explanation

Lead V1 shows ST elevation and a hyperacute T-wave. This finding is especially significant in the presence of ST depression in V2, because the posterior wall should attenuate any ST elevation in V1. ST elevation in V1 in this context is diagnostic of right ventricular myocardial infarction. Right ventricular myocardial infarction causes hypotension.

Atypical Presentation

It is common for very elderly patients to have atypical symptoms of acute myocardial infarction. In the absence of chest pain, diagnostic certainty may be reduced despite ECG findings.

Biomarkers and Management

The first troponin I returned very high at 14 ng/mL (fourth generation, equivalent to 14,000 ng/L). Thrombolytics were administered.

The second troponin was lower at 12 ng/mL. The ECG showed high acuteness. Although there was subacute infarction with falling troponin, recurrent chest pain and hyperacute T-waves implied re-occlusion.

Follow-Up

Cardiology did not take the patient immediately to the cath lab due to concern that the patient would not tolerate lying flat. Echocardiography showed a dilated right ventricle with good left ventricular function, prompting concern for pulmonary embolism. Pain resolved and troponins trended down.

The right ventricle was dilated due to right ventricular myocardial infarction, not pulmonary embolism.

Next-day angiography showed a 90% proximal right coronary artery culprit lesion that was stented. The right coronary artery was reperfused, almost certainly due to thrombolytics.

Learning Points

Thrombolytics are beneficial in STEMI(–) OMI when clinical and ECG findings are specific for OMI.

Any amount of ST elevation in V1 in the presence of inferior OMI implies right ventricular myocardial infarction.

Right ventricular myocardial infarction causes hypotension and is associated with high mortality if not reperfused.

Right ventricular myocardial infarction is caused by proximal right coronary artery occlusion, proximal to the right ventricular marginal branch.

Not all proximal right coronary artery occlusions cause right ventricular myocardial infarction because many patients have collateral flow from the left anterior descending artery.

Hyperacute T-waves without Q waves indicate sufficient acuteness for thrombolysis.

Diagnostic Considerations in Atypical Presentations

Assessment is challenging due to atypical symptoms and prolonged symptom duration. A prior ECG would be invaluable for identifying new changes. Recurrence of pain during Emergency Department observation supports ongoing ischemia. Repeating the ECG and performing bedside echocardiography during symptoms to assess for regional wall motion abnormalities may remove diagnostic doubt.