A previously healthy man in his 70s presented to the emergency department with one hour of dull retrosternal chest pain radiating to the left shoulder. He reported no cardiac history and had undergone a stress test six days prior that was reported as normal. He had been given a clean bill of health by his cardiologist.

An ECG was obtained at time 0000. No prior ECGs were available.

Initial ECG

The ECG was triaged as “No STEMI.”

The treating physician recognized the ECG as concerning for occlusion myocardial infarction, most notably a hyperacute T wave in lead V2, with lesser changes in leads V3 and V4.

There may be early signs of reperfusion, including terminal T-wave inversion in leads V3 and V4.

Clinical Course and Repeat ECG

The patient continued to have severe chest pain rated at 8/10. He was treated with aspirin and sublingual nitroglycerin.

With improving pain, a repeat ECG was obtained at time 0058.

In the repeat ECG, lead V2 appeared less hyperacute. There were now terminal T-wave inversions in leads V3 through V5, suggestive of reperfusion and consistent with improving acute coronary syndrome symptoms.

Dynamic ECG changes were present despite improvement in symptoms.

Management Discussion

A nitroglycerin infusion was started, and interventional cardiology was consulted.

Interventional cardiology agreed that there were dynamic ECG changes but requested consultation with the patient’s cardiology group prior to catheterization due to the recent reassuring stress test.

The patient’s pain continued to improve on nitroglycerin.

Stress tests are unreliable for emergency department risk stratification of chest pain. Stress testing does not reliably detect unstable plaques, and many myocardial infarctions arise from non-flow-limiting coronary lesions.

Stress tests have limited sensitivity for obstructive coronary artery disease and may be as low as 45%.

Biomarkers and Catheterization

The patient’s primary cardiologist recommended obtaining a troponin level to help decide on catheterization, as the initial ECG was felt to be relatively unremarkable.

The initial high-sensitivity troponin returned at 92 (upper limit for men 22).

The patient was started on heparin and underwent cardiac catheterization at approximately 0400 while pain-free.

Cardiac catheterization revealed severe triple-vessel coronary artery disease, including 50% stenosis of the left main coronary artery and complex stenoses throughout the left anterior descending artery, with up to 80% stenosis in the distal LAD. No single acute culprit lesion was identified.

Peak troponin was not measured.

Surgical Management and Outcome

Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted.

The patient underwent coronary artery bypass grafting ×4 the following day.

The hospital course was complicated by atrial fibrillation and volume overload. The patient ultimately recovered and was doing well.

An ECG obtained several months later demonstrated that the hyperacute changes on the initial ECG were more apparent in retrospect.

The patient was fortunate to have spontaneous reperfusion prior to intervention. It is not possible to predict which patients will spontaneously reperfuse.

ECG Interpretation and Learning Points

Given the history of new-onset chest pain, the diagnosis of acute occlusion myocardial infarction should have been made at the time of the initial ECG.

The rhythm was sinus. Left anterior fascicular block was present.

The hyperacute T wave in lead V2 was disproportionately large relative to the QRS complex.

Supporting evidence included ST-segment straightening and terminal T-wave inversion in multiple precordial and inferior leads.

At least 7 of 12 leads showed abnormal ST-T wave morphology on the initial ECG.

Terminal T-wave inversion in multiple leads suggested spontaneous reperfusion, but spontaneous reopening may be transient, and prompt catheterization is indicated regardless of initial troponin values.

Comparison of serial ECGs side-by-side revealed dynamic ST-T wave changes in at least 10 of 12 leads.

Spontaneous reperfusion explains the absence of an identifiable culprit lesion at the time of catheterization.