=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ytaf648.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:09.991381",
  "file_size_bytes": 705719,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Articles",
  "source_folder": "Articles",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Articles/ytaf648.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===
Case summary A 64-year-old woman with pancreatic cancer treated with chemotherapy presented with shortness of breath and cough over the past
5 months and was admitted due to a 2-week history of worsening dyspnoea and peripheral oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography
found dilated right ventricle, interventricular septal flattening, and severe tricuspid regurgitation. Although contrast-enhanced com-
puted tomography showed no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism, pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy demonstrated multiple
wedge-shaped defects in the peripheral regions of both lungs. Right heart catheterization confirmed pre-capillary PH, and pulmonary
angiography revealed vascular narrowing of the peripheral pulmonary arteries. Based on the radiological findings and the relatively slow
clinical course, CTEPH was initially suspected. However, pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology—performed by aspirating a blood sam-
ple via a Swan–Ganz catheter from the wedged position during right heart catheterization—revealed tumour cells, confirming the
diagnosis of PTTM rather than CTEPH. Because of the poor prognosis, the patient received palliative care and died 2 months later.
Discussion Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy is a rare but fatal cause of PH and is rarely diagnosed antemortem. Pulmonary
wedge aspiration cytology is a minimally invasive and valuable tool that helps differentiate PTTM from CTEPH and plays a crucial
role in guiding both diagnosis and management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Keywords Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy • Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension • Pulmonary
hypertension • Pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology • Swan–Ganz catheter • Malignancy • Case report
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Learning points
• Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy (PTTM) is a malignancy-associated disease that causes fatal pulmonary hypertension and is
rarely diagnosed antemortem.
• Differentiating PTTM from chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is often challenging due to their similar
characteristics.
• Pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology using a Swan–Ganz catheter is a minimally invasive and effective tool for obtaining pathological evi-
dence to distinguish PTTM from CTEPH.
Introduction Case presentation
Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy (PTTM) is a A 64-year-old woman was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and lymph
malignancy-associated disease that leads to fatal pulmonary hyperten- node metastases 4 months earlier and was treated with S-1 chemother-
sion (PH).1Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy is rarely di- apy. She had also presented with dyspnoea and cough several months be-
agnosed antemortem and is often difficult to distinguish from chronic fore being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Chest computed
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) due to their simi- tomography (CT) showed multiple ground-glass opacities in the subpleur-
lar characteristics.2We report a case of PTTM secondary to pancreatic al regions of both lungs (Figure 1A). Although these were initially suspected
cancer that was initially suspected as CTEPH, but ultimately diagnosed as lung metastases, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
by pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology using a Swan–Ganz catheter. (FDG-PET) demonstrated only slight radiotracer accumulations
(Figure 1B), and bronchoalveolar lavage cytology revealed no malignancy.
Due to oxygen desaturation, she started home oxygen therapy at 1 L/min.
Summary figure
She was referred to our department with a 2-week history of progres-
sive dyspnoea, cough, and peripheral oedema 
observed with a peak gradient of 85 mmHg. These results suggested
right-sided heart failure caused by PH. She was treated with diuretics
and continuous dobutamine infusion. Suspecting pulmonary
thromboembolism, we performed contrast-enhanced CT, which re-
vealed no pulmonary thrombus (Figure 3A and B), and leg ultrasound
showed no deep vein thrombosis. However, pulmonary perfusion
scintigraphy demonstrated multiple wedge-shaped defects in the per-
ipheral regions of both lungs (Figure 3C and D).
After 15 days of the heart failure treatment, right heart catheteriza-
tion (RHC) was performed (Figure 4A) with 1 L/min of oxygen, showing
the following findings: mixed venous oxygen saturation 79.5%; arterial
oxygen saturation 97.4%; right atrial pressure 9 mmHg; pulmonary ar-
terial pressure 81/28 mmHg (mean 48 mmHg); pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure 10 mmHg; cardiac output 4.22 L/min; cardiac index
2.99 L/min/m2 by thermodilution; pulmonary vascular resistance 9.0
Wood units; and systemic arterial pressure 136/75 mmHg (mean
95 mmHg). These results indicated pre-capillary PH. Digital subtraction
pulmonary angiography, the gold standard for diagnosing CTEPH when
contrast-enhanced CT was inconclusive,3revealed vascular narrowing
of the peripheral pulmonary arteries (Figure 4B). Based on these findings
and the relatively slow progression of respiratory failure, CTEPH was
strongly suspected under a thrombogenic condition with cancer.
Anticoagulation therapy with edoxaban was initiated, and referral to
a specialized facility for treatments such as balloon pulmonary angio-
plasty was considered.
However, the pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology, consisting of
∼10 mL of blood aspirated via a Swan–Ganz catheter from the
wedged position in the left pulmonary artery during RHC, revealed tu-
mour cells (Figure 5). This finding confirmed that the pancreatic cancer
had metastasized to the lungs, leading to PH caused by PTTM rather
than CTEPH. The prognosis was estimated to be less than 1 year
because of pathological Stage IV pancreatic cancer. After informed
consent discussion, the patient and her family opted for chemother-
apy for pancreatic cancer and palliative care without PH-specific treat-
Figure 1 Chest computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose ments. She was discharged on the 27th day after hospitalization, but
positron emission tomography. (A) Chest computed tomography was re-admitted to the palliative care unit 2 months later due to
showed multiple ground-glass opacities located in the subpleural re- severe respiratory failure caused by PTTM. She received palliative
gions of both lungs. (B) Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomog- care with oxygen and morphine and died on the sixth day after re-
raphy demonstrated only slight radiotracer accumulations. CT, admission. The autopsy was not performed because the patient and
computed tomography; FDG-PET, fluorodeoxyglucose positron her family had declined.
emission tomography.
Discussion
Functional Class Ⅳ) and a 6 kg weight gain. Her past medical history Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy is a rare complication
included hypertension managed with nifedipine 40 mg and azilsartan of malignancy that develops fatal PH. It is pathologically characterized
20 mg daily. Vital signs showed blood pressure 145/86 mmHg, pulse by tumour cell embolization to the pulmonary vasculature, activation
rate 110 beats/min, respiratory rate 28/min, and SpO 96% on 3 L/ of the coagulation system, and intimal proliferation, resulting in pro-
2
min of oxygen via a nasal cannula. Cardiac examination revealed a gressive vascular occlusion and severe PH.1While gastric cancer is com-
pronounced second heart sound without murmurs. Pulmonary aus- monly associated with PTTM, its occurrence in pancreatic cancer is
cultation was normal. Jugular venous distension and bilateral pitting relatively rare.2
oedema were present, but pulmonary auscultation was clear. Pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy is observed in
Laboratory data showed mild anaemia (haemoglobin 11.4 g/dL), 0.9%–3.3% of patients with malignancy in autopsy studies, with most
thrombocytopenia (139 × 103/μL), normal troponin-T level, mildly diagnoses made postmortem.4The antemortem diagnosis is challenging
elevated liver enzymes, elevated D-dimer (18.5 μg/mL), and elevated due to two primary reasons: first, histopathological confirmation with
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (3172 pg/mL). Hepatitis B lung biopsy is the gold standard for definitive diagnosis, but the invasive
and C, autoimmune, and thrombophilia panels were unremarkable. procedure involves a high risk for PH patients.5Second, it is difficult to
Electrocardiogram showed S Q T pattern and negative T waves in distinguish PTTM from CTEPH, because they share similar clinical fea-
1 3 3
leads V –V . Chest radiograph showed right-sided pleural effusion tures.2 There are some differences between these two diseases.
1 6
and cardiomegaly. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated Symptomatically, cough is more common in PTTM than CTEPH.
normal left ventricular ejection fraction (73%), dilated right ventricle Clinically, PTTM typically progresses rapidly, with a median survival of
with reduced systolic function, interventricular septal flattening, and only 1 month following symptom onset,6 whereas CTEPH develops
mild pericardial effusion (Figure 2). Severe tricuspid regurgitation was over months to years.7 On pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy, PTTM
Figure 2 Transthoracic echocardiographic images. (A) Parasternal long-axis image showed right ventricular dilation. (B) Parasternal short-axis image
showed interventricular septal flattening.
Figure 3 Contrast-enhanced computed tomography and pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy. (A and B) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography
showed no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism. (C and D) Pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy in anterior and posterior views. It demonstrated
multiple wedge-shaped defects in the peripheral lungs. CT, computed tomography.
Figure 4 Right hear catheterization and pulmonary angiography. (A) Right heart catheterization was performed using a Swan–Ganz catheter.
Approximately 10 mL of blood was aspirated via a Swan–Ganz catheter from the wedged position in the left pulmonary artery for cytological analysis.
Blood sampling from the right pulmonary artery was unsuccessful due to the catheter abutting the vessel wall. (B) Pulmonary angiography revealed
vascular narrowing of the peripheral pulmonary arteries (arrows).
these differences are not always conclusive. Actually, in this case, cough
was present, but the clinical course was relatively slow, and the pulmon-
ary perfusion scintigraphy showed multiple wedge-shaped defects, a
finding more commonly associated with CTEPH.
Other causes of pre-capillary PH should also be considered, such as
pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, possibly related to chemotherapy,
and carcinomatous lymphangitis. In this case, however, the absence
of interlobular septal thickening or centrilobular ground-glass opacities
on CT made these diseases less likely.3The subsequent finding of tu-
mour cells in the pulmonary arteries confirmed PTTM as the final
diagnosis.
The pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology using a Swan–Ganz cath-
eter provides significant diagnostic value. This procedure is minimally in-
vasive and can be readily performed during RHC.9The sensitivity and
specificity were reported as 80%–88% and 82%–94%, respectively.10,11
Patients with suspected PTTM often suffer from progressive dyspnoea;
therefore, this less invasive method is useful and valuable. When
aspiration cytology cannot be performed due to patient’ instability,
non-invasive diagnostic tools such as FDG-PET and lung perfused blood
volume imaging on dual-energy CT may provide useful diagnostic infor-
mation.12,13However, these modalities are not always specific; there-
fore, aspiration cytology should be performed during RHC whenever
safely feasible, as it provides pathological evidence for the diagnosis of
PTTM. In our case, aspiration cytology played a crucial role in determin-
Figure 5 Cytopathological findings of the pulmonary wedge blood ing our treatment strategy. The detection of tumour cells in the
aspirate. Cytopathological examination of the pulmonary wedge pulmonary arteries led to a change from therapeutic intervention for
blood aspirate revealed tumour cells characterized by an increased CTEPH to palliative care for PTTM.
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio and hyperchromatic nuclei (arrows). In conclusion, PTTM is a progressive disease with poor prognosis
that is difficult to diagnose antemortem and to distinguish from
CTEPH. Pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology using a Swan–Ganz cath-
eter is a useful and minimally invasive diagnostic tool that can help dif-
often shows small peripheral perfusion defects, while CTEPH shows ferentiate PTTM from CTEPH and facilitate appropriate management
larger segmental wedge-shaped perfusion defects.