=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:15.849812",
  "file_size_bytes": 334459,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
Ashley EA, Niebauer J. Cardiology Explained. London: Remedica; 2004.
Chapter 14 Adult congenital heart disease
Congenital abnormalities of the heart and cardiovascular system are reported in almost 1% of
live births (see Figure 1) and about half of these children need medical or surgical help during
infancy. In the first decade, a further 25% require surgery to maintain or improve their life. Only
10% survive to adolescence without surgery. Of these 10%, however, many live a normal life for
years before their abnormality is discovered.
Figure 1
The relative incidence of common congenital heart defects.
ASD: atrial septal defect; PDA: patent ductus arteriosus;
TGA: transposition of the great arteries; VSD: ventricular
septal defect.
Recognizing adult congenital heart disease
There are a few signs that should alert generalists to the possibility of congenital heart disease:
murmurs, especially continuous – there are few degenerative diseases that produce
continuous murmurs
cyanosis, clubbing – unless there is coexistent lung disease, a patient with a murmur and
cyanosis should be referred for echocardiography
right bundle branch block (RBBB) – this occurs in 1% of the middle-aged population
without disease. When combined with a murmur, the patient should be referred for
echocardiography
In most cases, suspicion of congenital heart disease leads to a cardiology referral. However, an
awareness of the possible diagnoses will help your referral.
Ventricular septal defect
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) (see Figures 2 and 3) is the most common congenital heart
defect. Symptoms depend on the size of the defect and the age of the patient. Small VSDs are
usually asymptomatic and compatible with a normal life (in fact, about 40% close spontaneously
in early childhood). Large VSDs cause cardiac failure in the second or third month after birth. If
a large shunt does not produce symptoms during infancy, there is usually little disturbance until
late adolescence or early adult life when the patient develops high pulmonary vascular resistance,
breathlessness, fatigue, and cyanosis. There is progression to effort syncope, recurrent
hemoptysis, and heart failure.
Figure 2
Ventricular septal defect.
Figure 3
Atrial septal defect.
Recognizing VSD
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 1/6
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
In VSD patients, the apex beat may be hyperdynamic and there could be a systolic thrill. The
classic sign is a loud pansystolic murmur, often accompanied by a mid diastolic murmur at the
apex (due to high flow through the mitral valve) (see Table 1). In patients with raised pulmonary
vascular resistance, right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) is evident and the pulmonary second
sound might be accentuated, followed by the early diastolic murmur of pulmonary regurgitation.
Table 1
Characteristics of atrial septal defect and ventricular septal
defect. Note the wide, fixed splitting of the second heart
sound in atrial septal defect.
With small VSDs, the electrocardiogram (ECG) is normal. With larger ones, there is evidence of
biventricular enlargement (tall R waves and deep S waves in leads V1–V6), especially when
pulmonary vascular resistance is high. Similarly, with a small defect the chest x-ray (CXR) is
normal, but with a large shunt there is cardiomegaly and prominence of the pulmonary vessels.
Large shunts should be closed surgically. However, if pulmonary hypertension has developed,
surgery is usually contraindicated as closing it may worsen the pulmonary hypertension.
The main complication of VSD is infective endocarditis. Vegetations may appear at the tricuspid
valve, opposite or around the defect, or on the aortic valve. In certain lesions, aortic
incompetence may develop due to loss of support of the valve.
The prognosis for adults with uncomplicated VSD is good. Few patients have defects large
enough to cause serious hemodynamic problems, but all are exposed to the risk of infective
endocarditis.
Atrial septal defect
Three types of atrial septal defect (ASD) can occur:
ostium secundum is the most common type (70%). It can be large, but usually does not
affect the atrioventricular valves (see Figures 3 and 4)
ostium primum – the hole is situated close to the atrioventricular valves and can be
associated with an atrioventricular septal defect
sinus venosus is a defect situated near the entrance of the superior vena cava (SVC) or
inferior vena cava to the right atrium. It is unusual and is often associated with partial
anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (usually drainage of the right upper lobe into the
SVC)
Figure 4
Atrial septal defect (ASD) shown by (a) transesophageal
echocardiography, and (b) transesophageal Doppler.
Pathophysiology
The shunt of blood from the left atrium to the right atrium results in:
increased volume load and dilatation of the right atrium and right ventricle (RV)
increased pulmonary blood flow and enlargement of the pulmonary arteries
increase in size of the pulmonary veins
reduced filling of the left ventricle (LV) and aorta
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 2/6
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
Over time, the aorta and LV shrink, and pulmonary vascular resistance increases and causes
Eisenmenger syndrome (see below).
Recognizing ASD
Most patients with secundum ASD remain asymptomatic throughout their thirties, but visit their
doctor in middle-age with the onset of breathlessness and fatigue (note the nonspecific signs).
Symptoms are usually progressive and worsened by the development of atrial arrhythmias.
Patients with primum ASD tend to present earlier and with more severe symptoms.
The classic sign of ASD is wide, fixed splitting of the second heart sound, together with a
systolic murmur due to high flow across the pulmonary valve (see Table 1). Primum ASD may
be accompanied by mitral regurgitation.
ECG might indicate RBBB and either RVH and right axis deviation (secundum) or left axis
deviation (primum) (see Table 1). CXR may show cardiomegaly with a prominent pulmonary
trunk.
Management
ASDs that are large enough to give clear physical signs should be closed. Closure of an ostium
secundum defect is relatively easy and carries a low mortality rate. Correction of an ostium
primum defect, with its associated anomalies, is more difficult and carries a higher mortality rate.
More recently, percutaneous device closure of small and moderate size ASDs has been possible.
In this procedure, a "butterfly" device (eg, the Clamshell occluder, the Starflex occluder, or the
Amplatzer occluder) is manipulated noninvasively into the heart and "opened", whereupon it
grasps the defect on either side and closes it (see Figures 5 and 6).
Figure 5
The Clamshell occluder for closure of an atrial septal defect.
IVC: inferior vena cava; LA: left atrium; RA: right atrium.
Figure 6
The Amplatzer occluder (a) before and (b) after deployment.
Primum ASD requires prophylaxis for infective endocarditis, while secundum ASD does not.
Eisenmenger syndrome
This is the name given to reversal in the direction of a cardiac shunt caused by the development
of pulmonary hypertension. It applies regardless of whether the shunt is atrial or ventricular.
Initial flow is always from high pressure (left) to low pressure (right), but pulmonary pressure
can rise above systemic pressure and cause a reversal of flow.
Signs of pulmonary hypertension are RVH, pulmonary systolic click, and loud pulmonary valve
closure. CXR shows large main pulmonary arteries and branches with peripheral pruning. After
the development of Eisenmenger physiology, only heart–lung transplantation is of value in
management.
Bicuspid aortic valve
Bicuspid aortic valves often function normally throughout most of a patient's life. However,
fibrosis and calcification ultimately lead to aortic stenosis (see Chapter 9, Valve disease) and an
eventual requirement for surgical correction.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 3/6
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
Coarctation of the aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing of the lumen, usually just distal to the origin of the left
subclavian artery (see Figure 7). Most commonly, the patient presents in their twenties or thirties,
usually with hypertension. Without surgery, 50% die before the age of 30 years. Potential
treatments include resection of the narrowed segment with end-to-end anastomosis, repair
involving the subclavian artery, and balloon angioplasty – the role of which remains
controversial. Hypertension, which is often the presenting feature, must be aggressively treated
both before and after surgery (it commonly persists).
Figure 7
Coarctation of the aorta.
Pulmonary valve stenosis
Patients with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis usually remain asymptomatic until the onset
of atrial flutter/fibrillation or right heart failure, which lead to breathlessness, ascites, peripheral
edema, and a visit to the doctor. Fatigue, slight dyspnea, and effort syncope occur with severe
narrowing. The physical signs depend on the severity of the obstruction and secondary effects on
RV function. In severe stenosis, the arterial pulse is small and the jugular venous pulse exhibits a
large "a" wave. On palpation, there is nearly always a systolic thrill in the second left intercostal
space and there is a left parasternal heave. An early systolic "ejection" click and a loud ejection
murmur are best heard in the second intercostal space. The second sound is normal in mild cases,
but in more severe cases it is widely split and the second (pulmonary) element is soft. ECG
shows RVH in severe stenosis, while CXR shows a dilated pulmonary trunk with oligemic lung
fields. Balloon valvotomy is indicated in severe pulmonary stenosis. Surgical valvotomy is an
alternative.
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) describes a preservation of the connection between the
pulmonary artery and the aorta that exists in the fetus (see Figure 8). Since aortic diastolic
pressure is higher than pulmonary artery systolic pressure, there is continuous flow into the
pulmonary circulation, creating the characteristic continuous ("machinery") murmur, heard best
just below the left clavicle. In hemodynamically insignificant lesions (>50% of cases), patients
are asymptomatic. Patients with bigger shunts develop cardiac failure at an age that depends on
the severity of the lesion. Eisenmenger syndrome can occur with PDA. Treatment is surgical
closure of the duct; this can be carried out percutaneously.
Figure 8
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
Fallot's tetralogy
Fallot's tetralogy is one of the causes of cyanotic congenital heart disease. The features derive
from an abnormally positioned aorta that "over-rides" the interventricular septum (see Figure 9).
This causes:
Figure 9
Fallot's tetralogy with an "over-riding aorta".
perimembranous VSD
RV outflow obstruction (pulmonary stenosis)
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 4/6
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
RVH
The chief symptom is cyanosis on exercise. Children typically "squat" for relief of dyspnea after
exercise (almost pathognomonic). Chest pain, arrhythmia, and congestive heart failure are more
common in adults than in children. Clubbing is common. Surgical correction usually involves
resection of the hypertrophied RV infundibulum and VSD closure with incorporation of the aorta
into the RV. Adult Fallot's patients often suffer impaired exercise capacity due to poor RV
function.
Transposition of the great arteries
In transposition of the great arteries (TGA), the RV connects to the aorta and the LV connects to
the pulmonary artery (see Figure 10). The result, following peripartum closure of the foramen
ovale, is two parallel circulations – a physiology that is not compatible with life. The neonate
would die instantly were it not for the common coexistence of a patent foramen ovale, ASD,
VSD, or PDA. In infants, an improvement in symptoms can be achieved by creating a large
defect in the atrial septum to allow mixing of the blood between systemic and pulmonary
circulations (Rashkind's procedure – see Figure 11). This is performed by passing a balloon
catheter into the left atrium via the right atrium. After inflation, the balloon catheter is pulled
back forcefully into the right atrium, creating a tear in the septum. This procedure is usually
effective in the neonatal period and allows the child to live until the latter part of the first year of
life, when the Mustard operation can be performed. This involves rerouting venous return by
inserting an intra-atrial baffle. The definitive treatment is the arterial switch operation, in which
the arteries are switched back to their appropriate ventricles. The biggest challenge with this
procedure is reattaching the coronary arteries, the anatomical organization of which is variable in
TGA. In addition, the "low pressure" LV must take on filling of the systemic circulation.
Figure 10
Transposition of the great arteries (right-hand image).
Figure 11
Balloon atrial septostomy – Rashkind's procedure. ASD:
atrial septal defect.
Ebstein's anomaly
Ebstein's anomaly is the downward displacement of a portion of the tricuspid valve with
atrialization of a large part of the RV (see Figure 12). There is often an associated ostium
secundum ASD. The atrialized portion of the ventricle hinders rather than helps the forward flow
of blood and there is tricuspid regurgitation. Occasionally Ebstein's anomaly is asymptomatic,
but it generally presents in childhood or early adulthood with dyspnea, fatigue, signs of tricuspid
regurgitation, and right-sided cardiac failure. Patients with Ebstein's anomaly require prophylaxis
for endocarditis.
Figure 12
Ebstein's anomaly.
Further reading
1. Deanfield J, Thaulow E, Warnes C. et al. ; Task Force on the Management of Grown Up
Congenital Heart Disease, European Society of Cardiology; ESC Committee for Practice
Guidelines. Management of grown up congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J.
2003;24:1035–84. [PubMed: 12868424]
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 5/6
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 15:53 Adult congenital heart disease - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
2. Dent JM. Congenital heart disease and exercise. Clin Sports Med. 2003;22:81–99.
[PubMed: 12613088]
3. Morris PJ, Wood WC, editors. Oxford Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. Oxford University
Press, 2000.
4. Report of the British Cardiac Society Working Party. Grown-up congenital heart (GUCH)
disease: current needs and provision of service for adolescents and adults with congenital
heart disease in the UK. Heart. 2002;88(Suppl. 1):i1–14. [PMC free article: PMC1876264]
[PubMed: 12181200]
Copyright © 2004, Remedica.
Bookshelf ID: NBK2212
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2212/ 6/6
