=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "cardiology-explained.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:39:59.458723",
  "file_size_bytes": 1949314,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/cardiology-explained.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
EXPLAINED SERIES
Cardiology
One of the most time-consuming tasks in clinical medicine is seeking
the opinion of specialist colleagues. There is a pressure not only to
make referrals appropriate, but also to summarize the case in the
language of the specialist. Cardiology Explained is an essential tool explained
in this task. It explains the basic physiology and pathophysiologic
mechanisms of cardiovascular disease in a straightforward and
diagrammatic manner, gives guidelines as to when referral is
appropriate, and, uniquely, explains what the specialist is likely to do.
Euan A Ashley and Josef Niebauer
This facilitates an understanding of the specialty not available from
standard textbooks. With wide appeal, this book is ideal for any
hospital doctor, generalist, or even senior medical student who may
need a cardiology opinion; or for that matter, anyone who simply
wants some of cardiology – explained.
Contents
Cardiac arrest • Cardiovascular examination • Conquering the ECG
• Understanding the echocardiogram • Coronary artery disease
• Hypertension • Heart failure • Arrhythmia • Valve disease
• Infective endocarditis • Cardiomyopathy • Aneurysm and dissection
of the aorta • Pericardial disease • Adult congenital heart disease
“Cardiology Explainedis for the generalist who wants a no-nonsense,
jargon-explaining, up-to-date overview of the latest developments
in cardiology. It is not intimidating and is well-illustrated with clear
diagrams and clinical data. The 14 chapters cover the whole range of
modern cardiology in a thoroughly satisfactory manner.”
Professor Peter Sleight
Emeritus Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine,
University of Oxford, UK
Cardiology
explained
Euan
A
Ashley
and
Josef
Niebauer
--- Страница 2 ---
Cardiology
explained
--- Страница 3 ---
Remedica explained series
ISSN 1472-4138
Also available
Anal and rectal diseases explained
Interventional radiology explained
Forthcoming
Common spinal disorders explained
Published by Remedica
32–38 Osnaburgh Street, London, NW1 3ND, UK
Civic Opera Building, 20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1642, Chicago, IL 60606, USA
Email: info@remedicabooks.com
www.remedicabooks.com
Publisher: Andrew Ward
In-house editors: Tonya Berthoud, Helen James, Roisin O’Brien, & Cath Harris
Design: AS&K Skylight Creative Services
© 2004 Remedica
While every effort is made by the publisher to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinions, or statements
appear in this book, they wish to make it clear that the material contained in the publication represents a summary
of the independent evaluations and opinions of the authors. As a consequence, the authors, publisher, and any
sponsoring company accept no responsibility for the consequences of any inaccurate or misleading data or statements.
Neither do they endorse the content of the publication or the use of any drug or device in a way that lies outside
its current licensed application in any territory.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission
of the publisher.
Remedica is a member of the AS&K Media Partnership.
ISBN 1 901346 22 6
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
--- Страница 4 ---
Cardiology
explained
Euan A Ashley and Josef Niebauer
Euan A Ashley
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
Falk CVRC, 300 Pasteur Drive
Palo Alto, California 94305
USA
Josef Niebauer
Privatdozent and Consultant Cardiologist
Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology
University of Leipzig – Heart Center
Strümpellstr. 39
04289 Leipzig
Germany
--- Страница 5 ---
Foreword
Cardiology is a rapidly changing field. New technologies such as drug-eluting
stents, left ventricular assist devices, and novel inflammatory markers, and imaging
modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging and three-dimensional
echocardiography, offer us an unprecedented view of the function of the heart in
health and an unparalleled scope of therapies with which to treat disease. Yet,
although we cardiologists like to think that we are more innovative and pioneering
than our colleagues in other specialties, it seems at least possible that there are
equally exciting changes in other fields, too. All of this leaves the generalist as the
patient’s primary advocate, as the integrator of all these specialist opinions, trying
at once to learn enough of the new advances to communicate with both patient
and specialist, but not so much as to lose the big picture in amongst the details.
What the generalist needs is a concise, well written, beautifully illustrated guide to
cardiology. And fortunately, if you’re reading this, you’ve already found it! The
authors have recognized that generalists need help in staying up-to-date with
specialist advances in a way that journals can rarely provide: a comprehensive, yet
highly digestible update to cardiology that can jog the memory in a tactful but not
patronizing way. Further, it is organized not in the didactic way in which many
such textbooks are written, but in a way that will make sense to the practicing
clinician who needs the facts quickly to hand. Clear yet detailed explanations of
what cardiologists do can be found within these pages. Specific guides to
understanding cardiological tests and writing good referral letters are two of the
unusual, yet extremely useful places where this book differs from others you might
have read. All recommendations are, of course, consistent with the latest guidelines
from the European Society of Cardiology, the American Heart Association, and the
American College of Cardiology. Meanwhile, the historical nuggets remind us from
where we have come and just how lucky we are to make it this far (intact!).
Together, these things serve to make this book a unique and invaluable resource for
generalists and other subspecialists, both in hospital and in the community.
I highly commend you for picking it up!
Alan Yeung
Professor of Medicine (Cardiovascular),
Stanford University Medical Center, USA
--- Страница 6 ---
Preface
We may not be the most impartial commentators, but it seems to us that the heart
is the most interesting organ in the body. It beats in a tightly regulated, finely
coordinated, gracefully rhythmic fashion to distribute blood and oxygen to all
the other organs. It does this more than 2 billion times in the lifetime of an average
human. It can accelerate to power an Olympic athlete for 26 miles in a little
over 2 hours, and it can weaken to hold your 86-year-old patient hostage in her
favorite chair.
Yet the heart, so central to the metaphors of our language, has not revealed its
secrets readily. This may be because until relatively recently, it was believed the
heart was the only organ that could not be cut (heart surgery was unthinkable from
the time of Aristotle until the late 1800s). But this reflects the heart’s eternal
mystique. Since the invention of the stethoscope we have used technology to
reveal the innermost workings of the heart. In recent times, technological advance
has been ever more rapid. Indeed, the rapidity of this technological advance is what
led us to writing this book. Meanwhile, the bulk of cardiovascular disease remains
the realm of the generalists. From whose perspective, knowing when to make use
of specialists and knowing how to view their input in the context of the whole
patient is increasingly important, yet increasingly difficult. So this is the aim of our
book: to sit beside you when you wonder, “Should I refer this patient to a
cardiologist”; to look over your shoulder when you receive the cardiology clinic
letter; to whisper in your ear the normal left ventricular internal diameter. In short,
if our book can be your partner in working with your cardiologist then it has been
successful. If it can answer questions the answers to which you once knew, it has
been valuable. If it can explain the answers to questions you didn’t know you
wanted to ask, then it has been worth our while and worth your money. We care
deeply that this book fulfils your needs and welcome any feedback on its content,
explanatory style, or level of detail.
Many people have made this book possible. Too many to mention in these pages.
We would like to thank our wives Fiona and Dörte who have been patient and
understanding during the long nights and early mornings. Many cardiologists and
generalists gave advice and read chapters and we would like to thank them all here.
Finally, we’d like to thank Cath Harris, Andrew Ward, and all the team at Remedica
who coaxed and cajoled us, encouraged and enlivened our text, and heroically
rescued our diagrams from obscurity.
Euan A Ashley and Josef Niebauer
--- Страница 8 ---
To Angus Ashley, the best doctor I know
EAA
--- Страница 9 ---
“To study disease without books is to sail an
uncharted sea, while to study books without
patients is not to go to sea at all.”
William Osler, 1901
“As a cardiologist, I may panic when I see somebody
bleed from his nose, but not when I see a heart fibrillate.
This is my territory.”
Lofty L Basta, 1996
--- Страница 10 ---
Contents
Chapter 1 Cardiac arrest 1
Chapter 2 Cardiovascular examination 5
Chapter 3 Conquering the ECG 15
Chapter 4 Understanding the echocardiogram 35
Chapter 5 Coronary artery disease 45
Chapter 6 Hypertension 77
Chapter 7 Heart failure 93
Chapter 8 Arrhythmia 111
Chapter 9 Valve disease 145
Chapter 10 Infective endocarditis 167
Chapter 11 Cardiomyopathy 181
Chapter 12 Aneurysm and dissection of the aorta 189
Chapter 13 Pericardial disease 197
Chapter 14 Adult congenital heart disease 203
Abbreviations 215
Index 219
--- Страница 12 ---
Chapter 1
Cardiac arrest
Adult basic life-support algorithm
Check responsiveness Shake and shout
Open airway Head tilt/chin lift
If breathing:
Check breathing Look, listen, and feel
recovery position
Breathe Two effective breaths
Assess
Signs of a circulation
10 seconds only
Circulation present No circulation
Continue rescue breathing Compress chest
Check circulation 100 per minute
every minute 15:2 ratio
Send or go for help as soon as possible according to guidelines
1
--- Страница 13 ---
Chapter 1
Advanced life-support algorithm for the
management of cardiac arrest in adults
(US version)
Cardiac arrest
Basic life-support algorithm
Precordial thump
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Assess rhythm
Check pulse +/–
During CPR
VF/VT Non-VF/VT
(cid:127) Check electrodes, paddle positions, and contact
(cid:127) Attempt to place, confirm, secure airway
(cid:127) Attempt/verify IV access
Attempt
(cid:127) Patients with VF/VT refractory to initial shocks:
defibrillation x3
– epinephrine 1 mg IV, every 3–5 minutes, or
as necessary – vasopressin 40 U IV, single dose 1 time only
(cid:127) Patients with non-VF/VT rhythms:
– epinephrine 1 mg IV, every 3–5 minutes
CPR (cid:127) Consider: buffers, antiarrhythmics, pacing CPR up to
1 minute (cid:127) Search for and correct reversible causes 3 minutes
Consider causes that are potentially reversible
(cid:127) Hypoxia (cid:127) "Tablets" (drug OD, accidents)
(cid:127) Hypovolemia (cid:127) Tamponade, cardiac
(cid:127) Hydrogen ion – acidosis (cid:127) Tension pneumothorax
(cid:127) Hyper-/hypokalemia & metabolic disorders (cid:127) Thrombosis, coronary (ACS)
(cid:127) Hypothermia (cid:127) Thrombosis, pulmonary (embolism)
ACS: acute coronary syndromes; CPR: cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IV: intravenous;
OD: overdose; VF: ventricular fibrillation; VT: ventricular tachycardia.
2
--- Страница 14 ---
Cardiac arrest
Advanced life-support algorithm for the
management of cardiac arrest in adults
(UK version)
Cardiac arrest
Precordial thump
if appropriate
Basic life-support algorithm
if appropriate
Attach defibrillator/monitor
Assess rhythm
Check pulse +/–
VF/VT During CPR Non-VF/VT
(cid:127) Correct reversible causes
If not already
Attempt (cid:127) Check electrodes, paddle positions, and contact
defibrillation x3 (cid:127) Attempt/verify airway and O2 IV access
as necessary (cid:127) Give epinephrine every 3 minutes
(cid:127) Consider:
– amiodarone
– atropine/pacing
CPR – buffers CPR up to
1 minute 3 minutes
Consider causes that are potentially reversible
(cid:127) Hypoxia (cid:127) Tamponade
(cid:127) Hypovolemia (cid:127) Tension pneumothorax
(cid:127) Hyper-/hypokalemia & metabolic disorders (cid:127) Toxic/therapeutic disorders
(cid:127) Hypothermia (cid:127) Thromboembolic & mechanical obstruction
CPR: cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IV: intravenous; VF: ventricular fibrillation;
VT: ventricular tachycardia.
3
--- Страница 15 ---
Chapter 1
The adult basic life-support algorithm (UK version) is reprinted with permission
from the Resuscitation Council (UK) website and is available at: www.resus.org.uk
The advanced life-support algorithm for the management of cardiac arrest in adults
(US version) is reprinted with permission from the American Heart Association
(Circulation2000;102:I-143).
The advanced life-support algorithm for the management of cardiac arrest in adults
(UK version) is reprinted with permission from the Resuscitation Council (UK)
website and is available at: www.resus.org.uk
4
--- Страница 16 ---
Chapter 2
Cardiovascular examination
Although technology has a high profile in cardiology, clinical examination remains
a central tool, especially for the generalist.
General inspection
Many clues to the cardiac condition can be detected with a simple visual
inspection. In the acutely unwell patient, cyanosis, pallor, and sweatiness can all be
signs of impending danger – does the patient “look” ill? In nonacute patients,
cachexia is perhaps the most important feature to note on general inspection since
it is an important prognostic sign in heart failure. Palpation is essential to confirm
that girth is excess fluid (pitting edema). Certain physical appearances should
always prompt an awareness of cardiac abnormalities (see Table 1). Facial signs for
which there is evidence of an association with cardiac conditions are shown in
Table 2. Finally, it is important to document the condition of a potential cardiac
patient’s teeth.
Genetic disorder Associated cardiac manifestation
Marfan’s syndrome Aortic regurgitation (aortic dissection)
Down’s syndrome ASD, VSD
Turner’s syndrome Coarctation of the aorta
Spondyloarthritides, Aortic regurgitation
eg, ankylosing spondylitis
Table 1.Cardiac manifestations of genetic disorders. ASD: atrial septal defect;
VSD: ventricular septal defect.
Taking the pulse
Taking the pulse is one of the simplest, oldest, and yet most informative of all
clinical tests. As you pick up the patient’s hand, you should check for clubbing and
any peripheral signs of endocarditis (see Table 3). Note the rate and document the
rhythm of the pulse. The character and volume of the pulse can also be useful signs
and traditionally it is believed that these are easier to detect in larger arteries such
as the brachial and the carotid (see Table 4).
5
--- Страница 17 ---
Chapter 2
Facial sign Description Possible cardiac
association
Malar flush Redness around the cheeks Mitral stenosis
Xanthomata Yellowish deposits of lipid around the Hyperlipidemia
eyes, palms, or tendons
Corneal arcus A ring around the cornea Age, hyperlipidemia
Proptosis Forward projection or displacement of Atrial fibrillation
the eyeball; occurs in patients with
Graves’ disease
Table 2.Facial signs associated with cardiac conditions.
Peripheral Description Cardiac
sign association
Clubbing Broadening or thickening of the tips of Infective endocarditis,
the fingers (and toes) with increased cyanotic congenital
lengthwise curvature of the nail and a heart disease
decrease in the angle normally seen
between the cuticle and the fingernail
Splinter Streak hemorrhages in nailbeds Infective endocarditis
hemorrhages
Janeway lesions Macules on the back of the hand Infective endocarditis
Osler’s nodes Tender nodules in fingertips Infective endocarditis
Table 3.Peripheral signs associated with infective endocarditis.
Checking both radials simultaneously is important in all cases of chest pain as a
gross screening test for aortic dissection. Adding radiofemoral delay
(or radiofemoral difference in volume) may alert you to coarctation as a rare cause
of hypertension.
Peripheral pulses should also be documented, as peripheral vascular disease is an
important predictor of coronary artery disease:
• femoral – feel at the midinguinal point (midway
between the symphysis pubis and the anterior superior
iliac spine, just inferior to the inguinal ligament)
• popliteal – feel deep in the center of the popliteal fossa with
the patient lying on their back with their knees bent
• posterior tibial – feel behind the medial malleolus
• dorsalis pedis – feel over the second metatarsal bone
just lateral to the extensor hallucis tendon
6
--- Страница 18 ---
Cardiovascular examination
Type of pulse Pulse characteristics Most likely cause
Regularly irregular – 2nd-degree heart block,
ventricular bigeminy
Irregularly irregular – Atrial fibrillation,
frequent ventricular ectopics
Slow rising Low gradient upstroke Aortic stenosis
Waterhammer, Steep up and down stroke Aortic regurgitation,
collapsing (lift arm so that wrist is patent ductus arteriosus
above heart height)
Bisferiens A double-peaked pulse – the Aortic regurgitation,
second peak can be smaller, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
larger, or the same size as
the first
Pulsus paradoxus An exaggerated fall in pulse Cardiac tamponade,
volume on inspiration acute asthma
(>10 mm Hg on
sphygmomanometry)
Bounding Large volume Anemia, hepatic failure,
type 2 respiratory failure
(high CO)
2
Pulsus alternans Alternating large and small Bigeminy
volume pulses
Table 4.Abnormal pulses.
Blood pressure
This is described in Chapter 6, Hypertension.
Jugular venous pressure
Of all the elements of clinical examination, the jugular venous pressure (JVP) is the
most mysterious. It is highly esoteric, and whilst some people wax lyrical about the
steepness of the “y” descent, others will feel grateful to be convinced they see it at
all. Two things are very clear: (1) the JVP is a very useful clinical marker in many
situations, and (2) the exact height of the JVP is a poor guide to central venous
pressure. Taken together, this suggests that noting whether the JVP is “up” or
“down” is good practice in every cardiac patient. In particular, it can be very useful
in diagnosing right-sided heart failure and in differentiating a cardiovascular cause
of acute shortness of breath (right ventricular failure, pulmonary embolism) from
an intrinsic pulmonary cause (asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). For
the general physician, the waveform of the JVP (see Figure 1) is, for most purposes,
only of academic significance.
7
--- Страница 19 ---
Chapter 2
a a
v
c
y
x
Diastole Ventricular Diastole
systole
a wave x descent v wave y descent
Atrium contracting Atrium relaxing then Atrium tense, full; Atrium emptying,
tricuspid valve open filling, tricuspid tricuspid closed tricuspid open
closed
Figure 1.Waveforms of the jugular venous pressure (including a brief explanation for
each wave). The “c” wave represents right ventricular contraction “pushing” the tricuspid
valve back into the right atrium. Reproduced with permission from Oxford University
Press (Longmore JM et al. The Oxford Handbook of Clinical Medicine, 5th Edn, p. 79).
The JVP should be assessed with the patient reclined at a 45º angle (see Figure 2).
Accepted practice is that only the internal jugular vein should be used, as only this
vessel joins the superior vena cava at a 180º angle. The JVP is defined as the height
of the waveform in centimeters above the sternal angle (<4 cm is normal).
Abnormalities of the JVP are described in Table 5.
8
--- Страница 20 ---
Cardiovascular examination
Internal External
jugular jugular
vein vein
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Figure 2.The jugular veins. The patient is lying at a 45°angle, thus revealing the surface
markings of the neck.
JVP abnormalities Probable cause
Large “a” wave Tricuspid stenosis, pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary stenosis
Cannon wave Atrial fibrillation, complete heart block,
VVI pacing, ventricular tachycardia
(a cannon wave occurs when the
right atrium contracts against
a closed tricuspid valve)
Steep “x”, “y” descent Constrictive pericarditis, cardiac tamponade
Large “v” wave, “cv” wave Tricuspid regurgitation
Kussmaul’s sign Rise of JVP on inspiration, constrictive
pericarditis, cardiac tamponade
Table 5.Abnormalities of the jugular venous pressure (JVP).
Palpation
Before auscultation, inspection of the precordium can be a useful indicator of
previous surgery – eg, midline sternotomy suggests previous bypass, lateral
thoracotomy suggests previous mitral valve or minimally invasive bypass surgery
(left internal mammary artery to left anterior descending coronary artery). Locate
the apex beat – the furthest point laterally and inferioraly where you can clearly feel
the apex (usually the fifth intercostal space in the midclavicular line). There are
many different descriptions for abnormal apex beats. One scheme distinguishes
heaving (high afterload, eg, aortic stenosis) from thrusting (high preload,
9
--- Страница 21 ---
Chapter 2
eg, aortic regurgitation). The apex may also be “tapping”, but this reflects a
loud first heart sound. In addition, you should place your left hand over the
sternum and feel for any significant ventricular heave (right ventricular
hypertrophy) or thrill (tight aortic stenosis, ventricular septal defect).
Auscultation
Held by many as the key to physical examination, the importance of auscultation
remains, but is diminished in an age of increasingly portable echocardiography.
Listen over the aortic (second right intercostal space) and pulmonary (second left
intercostal space) areas and at the left lower sternal edge with the diaphragm of
your stethoscope (better for higher pitches), then use the bell for the apex (better
for lower pitches). If in doubt, use both. Press lightly with the bell. If you hear an
abnormality over the aortic or pulmonary areas, you should listen over the carotids.
If you hear an abnormality at the apex, listen in the axilla. Listen systematically.
Start with the heart sounds – ignore everything else.
Heart sound variations
When listening to heart sounds, note their volume (normal, diminished, loud) and
whether physiological splitting is present (see Figure 3).
Physiological splitting of the second heart sound is when the sound of aortic valve
closure (A2) occurs earlier than that of pulmonary valve closure (P2). It occurs in
inspiration and is more common in the young. It is caused by increased venous
return and negative intrathoracic pressure. This delays right ventricular emptying
and pulmonary valve closure, at the same time that pooling of blood in the
pulmonary capillary bed hastens left ventricular emptying and aortic valve closure.
Reverse splitting of the second heart sound can occur in conditions where aortic
valve closure is delayed, such as left bundle branch block or paced right ventricle,
or where pulmonary valve closure occurs early, such as in the B form of
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome. Wide fixed splitting of the second heart sound
occurs in atrial septal defect.
A third heart sound may be heard soon after the second heart sound. It is thought
to be due to rapid, high-volume filling of the left ventricle. As such, it is found in
pathological (left ventricular failure) as well as physiological (athletic heart,
pregnancy) states.
A fourth heart sound may be heard just before the first sound. This is caused
by atrial contraction filling a stiff left ventricle, eg, hypertensive heart or diastolic
heart failure.
10
--- Страница 22 ---
Cardiovascular examination
Systole
S4 S1 EC MSC A2 P2 S3 OS
S2
Figure 3.Relative positions of heart sounds and added sounds in auscultation. Sounds in
red are high pitched. A2: aortic component of second heart sound; EC: ejection click;
MSC: mid systolic click; OS: opening snap; P2: pulmonary component of second heart
sound; S1–S4: heart sounds 1–4.
Murmurs
When you have considered these heart sound variations, move on to consider the
gaps between the heart sounds. If you hear a murmur, first establish whether
it occurs in systole or diastole (time against the carotid pulse if necessary). Then
determine its length and, if short, its exact position (early, mid, or late; systole or
diastole) (see Figure 3).
Added sounds
An opening snap occurring after the second heart sound represents a diseased
mitral valve opening to a stenotic position. An ejection click soon after the first
heart sound occurs in aortic stenosis and pulmonary stenosis. A mid systolic click
is heard in mitral valve prolapse.
After listening to the heart
Listen to the base of the lungs for the fine inspiratory crackles of pulmonary
edema. If you suspect right-sided cardiac pathology, palpate the liver, which will be
enlarged, congested, and possibly pulsatile in cases of right ventricular failure or
tricuspid valve disease. Also, check the patient’s ankles for swelling.
Table 6outlines common associations in cardiovascular clinical examination.
11
--- Страница 23 ---
Chapter 2
AS Aortic Aortic Mitral Mitral Tricuspid Pulmonary
sclerosis/ regurgitation stenosis regurgitation regurgitation regurgitation
minimal
AS
Pulse Low Normal ↑volume, Low Normal/AF Normal/AF Normal
volume, collapsing volume,
slow normal/AF
rising
Pulse ↓ – ↑ – – – –
pressure
JVP – – – – – ↑, prominent –
systolic wave
(“cv” wave)
Apex Heaving, Just Thrusting, Tapping, Thrusting, – –
not palpable, displaced not displaced
displaced not displaced
displaced
First – – – Loud Soft – –
sound
Second Soft A2 A2 – – – – –
sound not soft
Added Ejection – – No third Third – –
sounds click can sound sound
occur with opening
bicuspid snap
valve
Murmur Loud, Ejection Blowing, Low, Pansystolic Pansystolic Early diastolic
harsh, systolic high-pitched rumbling,
mid- neither early diastolic mid-diastolic
systolic harsh nor
ejection loud
Heard Second Second LLSE Apex with Apex LLSE in Second left
best right right (patient patient inspiration ICS
ICS ICS forward in turned
expiration) to left
Radiates Into Faintly to – – To axilla – –
carotids carotids
Table 6.Common associations in cardiovascular clinical examination. AF: atrial fibrillation;
AS: aortic stenosis; ASD: atrial septal defect; ICS: intercostal space; JVP: jugular venous
pressure; LLSE: left lower sternal edge; PDA: patent ductus arteriosus; PR: pulmonary
regurgitation; VSD: ventricular septal defect. See Chapter 9, Valve disease, for more on
columns 1–9 and Chapter 14, Adult congenital heart disease, for columns 10–13.
12
--- Страница 24 ---
Cardiovascular examination
Tricuspid Pulmonary ASD VSD PDA Pulmonary
stenosis stenosis hypertension
Pulse Usually Low Normal/AF Normal Regular, Low volume,
low volume, volume collapsing AF
AF
Pulse – – – – ↑ –
pressure
JVP Prominent Large “a” – – – ↑(tricuspid
“a” wave wave regurgitation)
(if sinus with
rhythm) prominent
“a” wave
(if sinus
rhythm)
Apex – – Just May be Thrusting, –
palpable, displaced displaced
not
displaced
First – – – – – –
sound
Second – Soft P2 Wide fixed P2 may – Loud P2
sound splitting be loud
of S2
Added – – – – – –
sounds
Murmur Rumbling Harsh Ejection Pan-systolic Continuous –
mid-diastolic mid-systolic systolic (↑ ±early machinery
ejection flow across diastolic murmur with
pulmonary (PR) systolic
valve) ± accentuation
harsh,
explosive,
brief early
diastolic (PR)
and ejection
click
Heard LLSE Second – LLSE ± 5–7 cm above –
best (louder on left ICS second left and left of
inspiration) (louder on ICS 2nd left ICS
inspiration) beneath clavicle
Radiates – – – Apex Posteriorly –
Table 6.Continued.
13
--- Страница 25 ---
Chapter 2
Summary
A careful clinical examination can reveal much about the condition of your
patient’s heart. In addition, noting the findings of a full examination will
greatly facilitate specialist referral. In an age of high technology, skilled clinical
examination has yet to be surpassed in terms of convenience, safety, and value
for money.
Further reading
Bickley LS, Hoekelman RA, editors. Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History
Taking, 3rd edn. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Gleadle J. History and Examination at a Glance. Blackwell Science, 2003
Perloff JK. Physical Examination of the Heart and Circulation, 3rd edn. WB Saunders, 2000.
Turner RC, Blackwood RA. Lecture Notes on Clinical Skills, 3rd edn. Blackwell Science, 1997.
14
--- Страница 26 ---
Chapter 3
Conquering the ECG
Besides the stethoscope, the electrocardiogram (ECG) is the oldest and most
enduring tool of the cardiologist. A basic knowledge of the ECG will enhance the
understanding of cardiology (not to mention this book).
Electrocardiography
At every beat, the heart is depolarized to trigger its contraction. This electrical
activity is transmitted throughout the body and can be picked up on the skin.
This is the principle behind the ECG. An ECG machine records this activity
via electrodes on the skin and displays it graphically. An ECG involves attaching
10 electrical cables to the body: one to each limb and six across the chest.
ECG terminology has two meanings for the word “lead”:
• the cable used to connect an electrode to the ECG recorder
• the electrical view of the heart obtained from any one
combination of electrodes
Carrying out anECG
1) Ask the patient to undress down to the waist and lie down
2) Remove excess hair where necessary
3) Attach limb leads (anywhere on the limb)
4) Attach the chest leads (see Figure 1) as follows:
• V1 and V2: either side of the sternum on the fourth rib (count down from the
sternal angle, the second rib insertion)
• V4: on the apex of the heart (feel for it)
• V3: halfway between V2 and V4
• V5 and V6: horizontally laterally from V4 (not up towards the axilla)
5) Ask the patient to relax
6) Press record
15
--- Страница 27 ---
Chapter 3
1
2
Angle of
Louis 3
4
5
V2 6
V1 V6
V3 V5
V4
Figure 1.Standard attachment sites for chest leads.
The standard ECG uses 10 cables to obtain 12 electrical views of the heart.
The different views reflect the angles at which electrodes “look” at the heart and
the direction of the heart’s electrical depolarization.
Limb leads
Three bipolar leads and three unipolar leads are obtained from three electrodes
attached to the left arm, the right arm, and the left leg, respectively. (An electrode
is also attached to the right leg, but this is an earth electrode.) The bipolar limb
leads reflect the potential difference between two of the three limb electrodes:
• lead I: right arm–left arm
• lead II: right arm–left leg
• lead III: left leg–left arm
The unipolar leads reflect the potential difference between one of the three limb
electrodes and an estimate of zero potential – derived from the remaining two limb
electrodes. These leads are known as augmented leads. The augmented leads and
their respective limb electrodes are:
• aVR lead: right arm
• aVL lead: left arm
• aVF lead: left leg
16
--- Страница 28 ---
Conquering the ECG
aVR (-150˚)
aVL (-30˚)
I (0˚)
III (+120˚)
II (+60˚)
aVF (+90˚)
Figure 2.The limb leads looking at the heart in a vertical plane.
View Lead
Inferior II, III, aVF
Anterior I, aVL, V1–V3
Septal V3, V4
Lateral V4–V6
Table 1.ECG leads and their respective views of the heart.
Chest leads
Another six electrodes, placed in standard positions on the chest wall, give rise to
a further six unipolar leads – the chest leads (also known as precordial leads),
V1–V6. The potential difference of a chest lead is recorded between the relevant
chest electrode and an estimate of zero potential – derived from the average
potential recorded from the three limb leads.
Planes of view
The limb leads look at the heart in a vertical plane (see Figure 2), whereas the chest
leads look at the heart in a horizontal plane. In this way, a three-dimensional
electrical picture of the heart is built up (see Table 1).
17
--- Страница 29 ---
Chapter 3
PERFORMING DOGS
British physiologist Augustus D Waller of St Mary’s Medical School, London,
published the first human electrocardiogram in the British Medical Journalin
1888. It was recorded from Thomas Goswell, a technician in the laboratory,
using a capillary electrometer. After that, Waller used a more available subject
for his demonstrations – his dog Jimmy, who would patiently stand with his
paws in glass jars of saline.
AVN
Bundle of His
SAN
Anterior fascicle
Left bundle branch
Right bundle branch
Internodal
pathways Purkinje fibers
Posterior fascicle
Figure 3.The cardiac depolarization route. AVN: atrioventricular node; SAN: sinoatrial
node. Reproduced with permission from WB Saunders (Guyton A, Hall J. Textbook of
Medical Physiology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996).
Depolarization of the heart
The route that the depolarization wave takes across the heart is outlined in
Figure 3. The sinoatrial node (SAN) is the heart’s pacemaker. From the SAN, the
wave of depolarization spreads across the atria to the atrioventricular node (AVN).
The impulse is delayed briefly at the AVN and atrial contraction is completed.
The wave of depolarization then proceeds rapidly to the bundle of His where it
splits into two pathways and travels along the right and left bundle branches. The
impulse travels the length of the bundles along the interventricular septum to the
base of the heart, where the bundles divide into the Purkinje system. From here,
the wave of depolarization is distributed to the ventricular walls and initiates
ventricular contraction.
18
--- Страница 30 ---
Conquering the ECG
R
J point
P T
U
ST
segment
Q
PR
interval
S
QRS
interval
QT
interval
Figure 4.The basic pattern of electrical activity across the heart.
The ECG trace
The ECG machine processes the signals picked up from the skin by electrodes and
produces a graphic representation of the electrical activity of the patient’s heart.
The basic pattern of the ECG is logical:
• electrical activity towards a lead causes an upward deflection
• electrical activity away from a lead causes a downward deflection
• depolarization and repolarization deflectionsoccur in opposite directions
The basic pattern of this electrical activity was first discovered over a hundred years
ago. It comprises three waves, which have been named P, QRS (a wave complex),
and T (see Figure4).
P wave
The P wave is a small deflection wave that represents atrial depolarization.
PR interval
The PR interval is the time between the first deflection of the P wave and the first
deflection of the QRS complex.
19
--- Страница 31 ---
Chapter 3
(a)
LA V6
RA LV
RV
V5
V1 V2 V3 V4
(b)
V1 V4–V6
Figure 5. (a) A horizontal section through the chest showing the orientation of the chest
leads with respect to the chambers of the heart. (b) In lead V1, depolarization of the
interventricular septum occurs towards the lead, thus creating an upward deflection
(Rwave) on the ECG. It is followed by depolarization of the main mass of the LV, which
occurs away from the lead, thus creating a downward deflection (S wave). This pattern
is reversed for lead V6, explaining the different shapes of the QRS complex. This pattern
should be checked in every ECG. LA: left atrium; LV: left ventricle; RA: right atrium;
RV: right ventricle.
QRS wave complex
The three waves of the QRS complex represent ventricular depolarization. For the
inexperienced, one of the most confusing aspects of ECG reading is the labeling of
these waves. The rule is: if the wave immediately after the P wave is an upward
deflection, it is an R wave; if it is a downward deflection, it is a Q wave:
• small Q waves correspond to depolarization of the interventricular
septum. Q waves can also relate to breathing and are generally small
and thin. They can also signal an old myocardial infarction (in which
case they are big and wide)
• the R wave reflects depolarization of the main mass of the ventricles –
hence it is the largest wave
• the S wave signifies the final depolarization of the ventricles, at the base
of the heart
20
--- Страница 32 ---
Conquering the ECG
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 6. Example of a normal ECG.
ST segment
The ST segment, which is also known as the ST interval, is the time between the
end of the QRS complex and the start of the T wave. It reflects the period of zero
potential between ventricular depolarization and repolarization.
T wave
T waves represent ventricular repolarization (atrial repolarization is obscured by the
large QRS complex).
Wave direction and size
Since the direction of a deflection, upward or downward, is dependent on whether
the electrical activity is going towards or away from a lead, it differs according to
the orientation of the lead with respect to the heart (see Figure 5).
The ECG trace reflects the net electrical activity at a given moment. Consequently,
activity in one direction is masked if there is more activity, eg, by a larger mass, in the
other direction. For example, the left ventricle muscle mass is much greater than the
right, and therefore its depolarization accounts for the direction of the biggest wave.
Interpreting the ECG
A normal ECG tracing is provided in Figure 6. The only way to become confident
at reading ECGs is to practice. It is important to be methodical – every ECG
reading should start with an assessment of the rate, rhythm, and axis. This
approach always reveals something about an ECG, regardless of how unusual it is.
21
--- Страница 33 ---
Chapter 3
Number of large squares Heart rate
between QRS complexes (bpm)
5 60
4 75
3 100
2 150
Table 2.Some common heart rates as determined by analysis of the QRS complex.
Rate
Identify the QRS complex (this is generally the biggest wave); count the number of
large squares between one QRS wave and the next; divide 300 by this number to
determine the rate (see Table 2).
Rhythm
P waves are the key to determining whether a patient is in sinus rhythm or not.
If P waves are not clearly visible in the chest leads, look for them in the other leads.
The presence of P waves immediately before every QRS complex indicates sinus
rhythm. If there are no P waves, note whether the QRS complexes are wide or
narrow, regular or irregular.
No P waves and irregular narrow QRS complexes
This is the hallmark of atrial fibrillation (see Figure 7). Sometimes the baseline
appears “noisy” and sometimes it appears entirely flat. However, if there are no
P waves and the QRS complexes appear at randomly irregular intervals, the
diagnosis is atrial fibrillation.
Sawtooth P waves
A sawtooth waveform signifies atrial flutter (see Figure 8). The number of atrial
contractions to one ventricular contraction should be specified.
Axis
The axis is the net direction of electrical activity during depolarization. It is altered
by left ventricular or right ventricular hypertrophy or by bundle branch blocks.
It is a very straightforward measurement that, once it has been grasped, can be
calculated instantaneously:
• find the QRS complex in the I and aVF leads (because these look
at the heart at 0º and +90º, respectively)
• determine the net positivity of the QRS wave from each of the two leads by
subtracting the S wave height (the number of small squares that it crosses
22
--- Страница 34 ---
Conquering the ECG
Figure 7.ECG demonstrating atrial fibrillation.
Figure 8.ECG demonstrating atrial flutter – note the characteristic sawtooth waveform.
(a) (b) (c)
Start1 2 3 4 5
5 positive +3 0˚
8 positive +5 30˚ 1
2
3
2 negative 90˚ End
3 negative
Figure 9.Vector diagram to determine the QRS axis.
as it dips below the baseline – if it does) from the R wave height (the
number of small squares that it crosses as it rises) (see Figure 9a and9b)
• plot out the net sizes of these QRS waves against each other on a
vector diagram (see Figure 9c). For the I lead, plot net positives to
the right and net negatives to the left; for the aVF lead, plot positive
downwards and negative upwards
• the direction of the endpoint from the starting point represents the
axis or predominant direction of electrical depolarization (determined
primarily by the muscle mass of the left ventricle). It is expressed as
an angle and can be estimated quite easily (normal is 0º–120º)
23
--- Страница 35 ---
Chapter 3
HUMAN RESUSCITATION
The first electrical resuscitation of a human took place (almost certainly)
in 1872. The resuscitation of a drowned girl with electricity is described
by Guillaume Benjamin Amand Duchenne de Boulogne, a pioneering
neurophysiologist, in the third edition of his textbook on the medical uses of
electricity. Although it is sometimes described as the first artificial pacing, the
stimulation was of the phrenic nerve and not the myocardium.
ECG abnormalities
This section discusses the most important and most frequently encountered
ECG abnormalities.
Normal variations
• Small Q waves and inverted T waves in lead III often disappear on deep
inspiration. Occasional septal Q waves can be seen in other leads.
• ST elevation following an S wave (“high take off”) is common in leads
V2–V4 and is quite normal. Differentiating this from pathological
ST elevation can be difficult and relies on the patient’s history and the
availability of a previous ECG. These “repolarization abnormalities”
are more common in the young and in athletes.
• T-wave inversion is common in Afro-Caribbean blacks.
• U waves – small extra waves following T waves – are seen in hypokalemic
patients, but can also represent a normal variant.
• Ventricular extrasystoles – no P waves, broad and abnormal QRS complexes,
and T waves interspersed between normal sinus rhythm – sometimes occur
and do not require further investigation unless they are associated with
symptoms (such as dizziness, palpitations, exercise intolerance, chest pain,
shortness of breath) or occur several times every minute.
Pathological variations
Long PR interval
A distance of more than five small squares from the start of the P wave to the start
of the R wave (or Q wave if there is one) constitutes first-degree heart block
(see Figure 10). It rarely requires action, but in the presence of other abnormalities
might be a sign of hyperkalemia, digoxin toxicity, or cardiomyopathy.
24
--- Страница 36 ---
Conquering the ECG
Figure 10.ECG demonstrating first-degree heart block.
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aV2 V3 V6
Figure 11.ECG demonstrating abnormal Q waves in V1–V4. This is indicative of a
previous infarction.
EKG OR ECG?
There is some debate over exactly who invented the electrocardiogram. The
Dutch “K” (elektrokardiogram) is often used as a tribute to the Indonesian-
born physician Wilhelm Einthoven who, while working in The Netherlands in
1924, received the Nobel prize for “the discovery of the mechanism of the
electrocardiogram”. In fact, it was Augustus Désiré Waller, a physician trained
in Edinburgh, who presented – to the students of St Mary’s Hospital medical
school, London, at the introductory lecture of the 1888 academic year – his
“cardiograph”, the first ever ECG recording in man. It was some years later,
in 1901, that Wilhelm Einthoven reported his string galvanometer – with the
limb leads labeled I, II, and III and the waves labeled P, QRS, and T as we
know them today. In fact, although often credited with inventing the term
electrocardiogram (which is why it is sometimes spelt the Dutch way),
Einthoven credits Waller with this distinction in his 1895 publication in
Pflügers Archives “Über die Form des menschlichen Elektrokardiogramms”.
25
--- Страница 37 ---
Chapter 3
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
Figure 12.ECG demonstrating left ventricular hypertrophy. Note also the T-wave
inversion in leads V4–V6. This is often labeled “strain”.
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
Figure 13.ECG demonstrating left bundle branch block.
Q waves
A normal ECG has only very small Q waves. A downward deflection immediately
following a P wave that is wider than two small squares or greater in height than a
third of the subsequent R wave is significant: such Q waves canrepresent previous
infarction (see Figure 11, previous page).
26
--- Страница 38 ---
Conquering the ECG
Left bundle branch block Right bundle branch block
V1 V6 V1 V6
Figure 14.The shapes of V1 and V6 QRS complexes in left and right bundle branch
block.
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 15.ECG demonstrating anteroseptal myocardial infarction. Note the
ST-segment elevation.
Large QRS complexes
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is one of the easiest and most useful diagnoses
to make (see Figure 12). The Sokolow–Lyon index is the most commonly calculated
index of estimation. Does the sum of the S wave in lead V1 (SV1) and the R wave
in V6 (RV6) add up to more than 3.5 mV, ie, 35 small or seven big squares? If so,
the patient has LVH by voltage criterion. Right ventricular hypertrophy is indicated
by a dominant R wave in V1 (ie, R wave bigger than following S wave;
Sokolow–Lyon index: R in V1 + S in V5 or V6 ≥1.05 mV) and right axis deviation.
Broad QRS complexes and strange-looking ECGs
A wide QRS complex despite sinus rhythm is the hallmark of bundle branch block.
Left bundle branch block (LBBB) can cause the ECG to look extremely abnormal
(see Figure 13). When faced with such an ECG – after calculating rate, rhythm,
and axis – check the width of the QRS complex. If it is more than three small
squares wide, it is abnormal. Bundle branch block can then be diagnosed by
pattern recognition of the QRS complexes in the V1 and V6 leads (see Figure 14).
New LBBB can be diagnostic of myocardial infarction (MI).
27
--- Страница 39 ---
Chapter 3
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
V1
II
Figure 16.ECG demonstrating ST-segment depression (I, V3–V6).
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
V1
II
Figure 17.ECG demonstrating T-wave inversion.
ST segment changes
The ST segment extends from the end of the S wave to the start of the T wave.
It should be flat or slightly upsloping and level with the baseline. Elevation of more
than two small squares in the chest leads or one small square in the limb leads,
combined with a characteristic history, indicates the possibility of MI (see
Figure15, previous page). ST depression is diagnostic of ischemia (see Figure16).
It is worth noting that although ST elevation can localize the lesion (eg, anterior MI,
28
--- Страница 40 ---
Conquering the ECG
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
V1
II
V5
Figure 18.ECG demonstrating a long QT interval.
inferior MI), ST depression cannot. Concave upwards ST elevation in all 12 leads is
diagnostic of pericarditis.
T waves
In a normal ECG, T waves are upright in every lead except aVR. T-wave inversion
can represent current ischemia or previous infarction (see Figure 17).
In combination with LVH and ST depression, it can represent “strain”. This form
of LVH carries a poor prognosis.
Long QT interval
The QT interval should be less than half of the R–R interval. Calculation of the
corrected QT (QTc) is generally not necessary andusually will have been done by
the ECG machine (but beware of blindly believing any automated diagnostic
system). Conditions associated with a long QT interval are outlined in Table 3
(seeFigure 18).
Long QT syndrome may also be drug-induced (see Table 4, p. 32). Once this
occurs, the responsible drug needs to be discontinued.
29
--- Страница 41 ---
Chapter 3
Congenital Acquired
Jervell and Lange–Nielsen syndrome Amiodarone, sotalol
Romano–Ward syndrome Flecainide
Hypocalcemia
Hypokalemia
Hypomagnesemia
Phenothiazines
Tricyclic antidepressants
Table 3.Causes of a long QT interval.
Pattern combinations
Digoxin
A reverse tick ST depression is characteristic and does not indicate toxicity. Digoxin
toxicity can result in dysrhythmia.
Pulmonary embolism
Sinus tachycardia is seen in many patients with pulmonary embolism. New right
bundle branch block (RBBB) or right axis deviation with “strain” can also indicate
PE. The classic SQ T is less common.
I III III
Hyperkalemia
The absolute potassium level is less important than its rate of rise. ECG changes
reflecting a rapid rise demand immediate action (see Figures 19–21). The level
of danger increases as the ECG changes progress. The sequence generally follows
the order:
• tall, tented T waves (see Figure 19)
• lengthening of the PR interval
• reduction in the P-wave height
• widening of the QRS complex (see Figure 20)
• “sinus” wave QRS pattern (see Figure 21)
A sinus-wave QRS should be treated immediately with calcium chloride, whilst
hyperkalemia associated with lesser ECG changes can be treated with
insulin/glucose infusion.
30
--- Страница 42 ---
Conquering the ECG
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
V1
II
V5
Figure 19.Hyperkalemia. Note the tall, tented Twaves.
aVR V1 V4
I
aVL V2 V5
II
aVF V3 V6
III
Figure 20.ECG demonstrating a widening of the QRS complex.
31
--- Страница 43 ---
Chapter 3
Generic QT Torsade Generic QT Torsade
name interval de pointes name interval de pointes
Antiarrhythmics Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
Ajmaline + + Fluoxetine + +
Amiodarone + +
Paroxetine +
Chinidine + +
Disopyramide + + Sertraline + +
Dofetilide + + Anticonvulsants
Ibutilide + +
Valproate +
Propafenone + +
Sotalol + + Other psychopharmaceuticals
Antibiotics (macrolides) Chloralhydrate + +
Azithromycin + Levomethadone + +
Clarithromycin + + Lithium +
Clindamycin +
Naratriptan +
Erythromycin + +
Roxithromycin + Sumatriptan +
Spiramycin + + Venlafaxine +
Antibiotics (quinolones) Zolmitriptan +
Gatifloxacin + + Anti-Parkinson’s
Grepafloxacina + +
Amantadine +
Levofloxacin + Budipinec + +
Moxifloxacin + +
Sparfloxacin + + Antimalarials
Other antibiotics Quinine + +
Amoxicillin + Chloroquine + +
Trimethoprim-
Halofantrine + +
sulfamethoxazole + +
Mefloquine +
Antihistamines
Astemizolea + + Diuretics
Clemastine + Indapamide +
Diphenhydramine +
Hydroxyzine + Lipid-lowering agents
Terfenadine + + Probucol + +
Antidepressants
Motility enhancers
Amitriptyline + +
Clomipramine + Cisapridea + +
Desipramine + + Nootropic geriatrics
Doxepine + Vincamine + +
Imipramine + + Chemotherapeutics
Maprotiline + +
Neuroleptics Tamoxifen + +
Amisulpride + Pentamidine + +
Clozapine + Immunosuppressants
Chlorpromazine + +
Droperidola + + Tacrolimus + +
Fluphenazine + Peptides
Haloperidol + + Octreotide +
Melperone + +
Olanzapine + Virostatics
Pimozide + + Foscarnet +
Quetiapine +
Sulpiride + + Muscle relaxants
Thioridazine + + Tizanidine +
Risperidone +
Sertindoleb + + X-ray contrast agents
Tiapride + + Ioxaglate + +
Trazodone + meglumine
Table 4.Drug-induced increase in the QT interval and torsade de pointes.
+ A prolonged QT interval can occur or torsade de pointes was observed.
aTaken off the market.
bSuspended from the market, final decision by the regulatory authorities still awaited.
cIndication limitations have been expressed.
Important tips on the use of the table: information is based on the latest scientific knowledge as far as it is generally
available from published studies (Medline research), case reports, internet publications, specialist information, the
Red List, and information from the regulatory authorities. In the case reports available about torsade de pointes,
the causal relationship to the ingestion of the particular medication is no longer apparent; pure coincidence cannot
be excluded in individual cases.
32
--- Страница 44 ---
Conquering the ECG
I
II
Figure 21.ECG demonstrating a sinus-wave QRS pattern.
PQRST?
Nobody knows for sure why these letters became standard. Certainly,
mathematicians used to start lettering systems from the middle of the alphabet
to avoid confusion with the frequently used letters at the beginning. Einthoven
used the letters O to X to mark the timeline on his ECG diagrams and, of
course, P is the letter that follows O. If the image of the PQRST diagram was
striking enough to be adopted by researchers as a true representation of the
underlying form, it would have been logical to continue the same naming
convention when the more advanced string galvanometer started creating
ECGs a few years later.
Further reading
Ashley EA, Raxwal VK, Froelicher VF. The prevalence and prognostic significance of
electrocardiographic abnormalities. Curr Probl Cardiol 2000;25:1–72.
Hampton JR. ECG Made Easy.London: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.
Rautaharju PM. A hundred years of progress in electrocardiography. 1: Early contributions
from Waller to Wilson. Can J Cardiol1987;3:362–74.
33
--- Страница 45 ---
34
--- Страница 46 ---
Chapter 4
Understanding the
echocardiogram
Although few generalists actually perform echocardiograms, most order or have
to interpret them at some stage. Our aim then is not to explain how to carry out
echocardiography, but how to realize its potential and limitations.
Background
“Ultra” sound has a frequency above the range audible by humans
(ie, >20,000 Hz). For adult cardiac imaging, ultrasound waves in the range of
4–7MHz are used (intravascular ultrasound uses frequencies as high as 30 MHz).
These are created within the ultrasound probe by striking piezo-electric crystals
with an electric pulse, which stimulates the crystals to release sound waves.
The central principle of ultrasound imaging is that, while most waves are absorbed
by the body, those at interfaces between different tissue densities are reflected.
In addition to emitting the ultrasound waves, the transducer detects the returning
waves, processes the information, and displays it as characteristic images. Higher
frequency ultrasound waves increase resolution, but decrease tissue penetration.
Imaging modes
There are three basic “modes” used to image the heart:
• two-dimensional (2D) imaging
• M-mode imaging
• Doppler imaging
Two-dimensional imaging
2D imaging is the mainstay of echo imaging and allows structures to be viewed
moving in real time in a cross-section of the heart (two dimensions). It is used for
detecting abnormal anatomy or abnormal movement of structures. The most
common cross-sectional views are the parasternal long axis, the parasternal short
axis, and the apical view (see Figure 1). The gastric or subcostal and suprasternal
views are also commonly used.
35
--- Страница 47 ---
Chapter 4
(a) (b) (c)
RV
RV LV
LV AV LV RV
LA RA LA
Figure 1. The most common two-dimensional imaging echo views. The first line
illustrates the three planes (think of them as three plates of glass intersecting at 90°),
the second line shows these three planes separated, and the third line shows
the accompanying echo views. (a) Parasternal long axis; (b) parasternal short axis;
(c) apical 4-chamber view (note, in the UK, the 4-chamber view is shown upside down).
AV: aortic valve; LA: left atrium; LV: left ventricle; RA: right atrium; RV: right ventricle.
M-mode imaging
The M-mode echo, which provides a 1D view, is used for fine measurements.
Temporal and spatial resolutions are higher because the focus is on only one of the
lines from the 2D trace (see Figure 2).
Doppler imaging
The concept of Doppler imaging is familiar to all those who have heard the note of
a police siren change as it moves past them – as the police siren travels towards
you, the frequency of the wave (pitch) appears to be higher than if it was
stationary; as the siren travels away, the pitch appears to be lower.
Estimates of blood-flow velocity can be made by comparing the frequency change
between the transmitted and reflected sound waves. In cardiac ultrasound,
Doppler is used in three ways:
36
--- Страница 48 ---
Understanding the echocardiogram
(a) (b)
Figure 2.M-mode image of (a) the aorta/left atrium and (b) the mitral valve, both in
a healthy heart.
Figure 3.Continuous-wave Doppler signal.
• continuous-wave (CW) Doppler
• pulsed-wave (PW) Doppler
• color-flow mapping (CFM)
Continuous-wave Doppler
CW Doppleris sensitive, but, because it measures velocity along the entire length
of the ultrasound beam and not at a specific depth, it does not localize velocity
measurements of blood flow. It is used to estimate the severity of valve stenosis or
regurgitation by assessing the shape or density of the output (see Figure 3).
Pulsed-wave Doppler
PW Doppler was developed because of the need to make localized velocity
measurements of turbulent flow (it measures the blood-flow velocity within a small
area at a specified tissue depth). It is used to assess ventricular in-flow patterns,
intracardiac shunts, and to make precise measurements of blood flow at
valve orifices.
37
--- Страница 49 ---
Chapter 4
Figure 4.Color-flow mapping.
Color-flow mapping
CFM uses measurements of the velocity and direction of blood flow to
superimpose a color pattern onto a section of a 2D image (see Figure 4).
Traditionally, flow towards the transducer is red, flow away from the transducer is
blue, and higher velocities are shown in lighter shades. To aid observation of
turbulent flow there is a threshold velocity, above which the color changes (in some
systems to green). This leads to a “mosaic” pattern at the site of turbulent flow and
enables sensitive screening for regurgitant flow.
Transesophageal echocardiography
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is usually carried out under mild
sedation with midazolam. A thin probe is passed down the esophagus until it is
level with the heart. This position provides especially clear views. It is particularly
useful for imaging posterior cardiac structures. The key indications for TEE are:
• infective endocarditis – if vegetations are not seen on transthoracic echo,
but suspicion is high, or with prosthetic valves
• to rule out an embolic source (especially in atrial fibrillation)
• acute dissection
• mitral valve (MV) disease preoperatively
Contrast echocardiography
Contrast echo can be useful for confirming a diagnosis of atrial septal defect (ASD).
Agitating saline or synthetic contrast create microbubbles. These are very reflective,
38
--- Страница 50 ---
Understanding the echocardiogram
Normal ranges for measures of systolic and diastolic function
Echocardiography
Fractional shortening (%) 28–44
Doppler
Systolic velocity integral (cm) 15–35
Mitral valve E (cm/s) 44–100
Mitral valve A (cm/s) 20–60
E:A ratio 0.7–3.1
Tricuspid valve E (cm/s) 20–50
Tricuspid valve A (cm/s) 12–36
E:A ratio 0.8–2.9
Time intervals
Mitral E deceleration time (ms) 139–219
Mitral A deceleration time (ms) >70
Isovolumic relaxation time (ms) 54–98
Normal intracardiac dimensions (cm)
Men Women
Left atrium 3.0–4.5 2.7–4.0
LV diastolic diameter 4.3–5.9 4.0–5.2
LV systolic diameter 2.6–4.0 2.3–3.5
IV septum (diastole) 0.6–1.3 0.5–1.2
Posterior wall (diastole) 0.6–1.2 0.5–1.1
Table 1.The approximate normal values for various cardiac structures. IV: interventricular;
LV: left ventricular.
and when injected intravenously can be seen as opacification in the echo window.
They are normally seen on the right side of the heart before being trapped and
absorbed by the pulmonary capillaries, so have no route to the left side of the heart.
The contrast created by the bubbles allows a left-to-right shunt to be seen as a jet
“interrupting” the opacification of the right atrium. However, there is a theoretical
risk of systemic air embolism with a right-to-left shunt.
Applications
Echo is the cheapest and least invasive method available for screening cardiac
anatomy. Generalists most commonly request an echo to assess left ventricular (LV)
dysfunction, to rule out the heart as a thromboembolic source, and to characterize
murmurs. The approximate normal values for various cardiac structures are
described in Table 1.
39
--- Страница 51 ---
Chapter 4
Figures 5.E and A waves representing mitral flow in a healthy heart (E>A).
Systolic dysfunction
LV systolic dysfunction is assessed using the ejection fraction (the percentage of the
end diastolic volume ejected during systole). In most cases, this is estimated by eye
from all the available echo views. A normal ejection fraction is 50%–80%, but
values as low as 5% are compatible with life (end-stage heart failure).
The E/A ratio
When flow across the MV is assessed with PW Doppler, two waves are
characteristically seen. These represent passive filling of the ventricle (early [E]
wave) and active filling with atrial systole (atrial [A] wave). Classically, the E-wave
velocity is slightly greater than that of the A wave (see Figure 5). However, in
conditions that limit the compliance of the LV, two abnormalities are possible:
• reversal – in which the A wave is greater than the E wave.
This indicates slow filling caused by older age, hypertension,
left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), or diastolic dysfunction
• exaggeration of normal – a tall, thin E wave with a small or absent
A wave. This indicates restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis,
or infiltrative cardiac disease (eg, amyloidosis)
Diastolic dysfunction
A normal LV ejection fraction in the presence of the heart failure syndrome leads
to a search for diastolic dysfunction. Typical echo findings in diastolic dysfunction
are normal LV cavity size, thickened ventricle, and reversed E/A ratio.
Wall-motion abnormality
When ischemia occurs, contractile abnormalities of segments of the myocardium
can be detected by echo prior to the appearance of electrocardiogram (ECG)
changes or symptoms. Therefore, echo can be a valuable tool in the diagnosis of
40
--- Страница 52 ---
Understanding the echocardiogram
Mild or no aortic stenosis Severe aortic stenosis
Area of effective
>1 <0.6
orifice (cm2)
Velocity across
<3 >4
valve (m/s)
Gradient of pressure
0–60 >60
drop (mm Hg)
Table 2.Echo characteristics of aortic stenosis.
both stable coronary artery disease (via stress echo) and acute myocardial
infarction. In the former situation, it offers localization of the ischemic region
where the ECG cannot; in the latter, it offers some measure of the extent of the
infarct and a screen for complications, such as ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Valve assessment
Echo is the tool of choice for the assessment of valvular abnormalities.
Aortic stenosis
The etiology of aortic stenosis (AS) can be confirmed by the visualization of either
a bicuspid valve or calcification. The severity of the stenosis can be estimated by
measuring high-velocity flow across the valve by Doppler. This can be converted to
an estimation of the pressure drop. In addition, the effective orifice area can be
measured (see Table 2).
Aortic regurgitation
CFM is the most useful technique for detecting and quantifying the degree of
regurgitation. The width of the regurgitant jet and of the slope of the decline in
pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the aorta (which is reduced already
compared with normal) are measured.
Mitral stenosis
With mitral stenosis (MS), as with AS, calcified, immobile MV leaflets can be
demonstrated with 2D and M-mode echo. Anterior motion of the posterior MV
leaflet in diastole (caused by commissural fusion) is characteristic in MS. Doppler
demonstrates increased flow velocity and can be used to estimate the effective
orifice area (see Table 3).
Mitral regurgitation
As with aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation is assessed using CFM. The
severity of mitral regurgitation is commonly reported as the area of the regurgitant
jet expressed as a percentage of the area of the left atrium.
41
--- Страница 53 ---
Chapter 4
Mild mitral stenosis Severe mitral stenosis
Area of effective
>1.5 <1
orifice (cm2)
Velocity across
<2.5 >3
valve (m/s)
Table 3.Echo characteristics of mitral stenosis.
Mitral valve prolapse
The criteria for the diagnosis of MV prolapse (MVP) from an echo have changed
over the years. Initial reports using the 4-chamber view suggested a population
prevalence of almost 20%. However, a more accurate figure of approximately
5% results from stricter criteria. Most diagnose only on the basis of the parasternal
long axis view. Some go so far as to suggest it is invalid to diagnose MVP on the
4-chamber view at all.
Paraprosthetic regurgitation
Although metal valves stop ultrasound completely, echo is a useful tool for
studying prosthetic valve function. The TEE approach is often used.
Infective endocarditis
Echo is the key investigation in infective endocarditis and, although a low threshold
for TEE is warranted by its higher detection rate, transthoracic echo can demonstrate
vegetations in approximately 70% of cases (see Chapter 10, Infective endocarditis).
Embolic sources
The primary cardiac sources for embolism are:
• an akinetic ventricular segment
• an LV aneurysm
• the atrial appendage
These are best visualized with TEE.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Although hypertrophy is variable, echo remains the screening tool of choice in
suspected cases. The classic features are asymmetrical hypertrophy of the
interventricular septum and anterior movement of the MV in systole. LV function
is normal, and there may be dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction.
42
--- Страница 54 ---
Understanding the echocardiogram
Further reading
Chambers JB. Clinical Echocardiography. London: BMJ Books, 1995.
Feigenbaum HMD. Echocardiography, 5th edn. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1994.
43
--- Страница 55 ---
44
--- Страница 56 ---
Chapter 5
Coronary artery disease
Background
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common cause of mortality in the
developed world. It results from the collision of ancient genes with modern
lifestyles: a hunter–gatherer lifestyle – with high daily energy expenditure and rare
kills – favors a tendency to eat large quantities of high-calorie food when it is
available. Such predispositions sit uneasily in a modern world with motorized
transport and fatty snacks on every corner. Despite this, so-called “hardening of the
arteries” was first described only in the 1700s, and it was not until the 1900s that
a good description of myocardial infarction (MI) was forthcoming.
The term “coronary artery disease” encompasses a range of diseases that result
from atheromatous change in coronary vessels. In the past, CAD was thought to
be a simple, inexorable process of artery narrowing, eventually resulting in
complete vessel blockage (and MI). However, in recent years the explanatory
paradigm has changed because it was realized that a whole spectrum of coronary
plaques exists – from stable (lipid-poor, thick fibrous cap) to unstable (lipid-rich,
thin fibrous cap) (see Figure 1). When an unstable plaque ruptures – and the more
unstable it is, the more likely it is to rupture – the subsequent release of
prothrombotic and vasoconstrictive factors increases the likelihood of complete
occlusion of the artery. It is the balance between the body’s prothrombotic and
thrombolytic pathways at the rupture site that determines the clinical outcome.
Transient occlusion leads to ischemia and pain; permanent occlusion leads to
transmural MI (see Table 1).
THROMBOSIS IN MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
The hypothesis that thrombosis plays a central role in myocardial infarction
was first proposed by James Herrick in JAMAin 1912. This paper was the first
to suggest that clots, rather than a slow accretion of plaque, are responsible for
the complete occlusion that would often result in death. Importantly, he was the
first to link symptoms in living patients with coronary artery disease, and to
suggest that patients can survive complete blockage. These ideas were radical
and new and (not surprisingly) no one believed him.
45
--- Страница 57 ---
Chapter 5
Stable Unstable Ruptured
Abundant Thick fibrous Abundant Thin fibrous
smooth cap macrophages cap Fibrin
muscle cells and lipid rich
WBC
RBC
Platelet
Rupture
Figure 1.An atherosclerotic plaque consists of a core of dead foam cells (lipid-engorged
macrophages and smooth muscle cells) covered by a fibrous cap (a region of the intimal
layer that has become thickened as a result of medial smooth muscle cells depositing
collagen and elastin fibers). The thickening artery wall of an atherosclerotic plaque gradually
encroaches upon the luminal space and can eventually result in a restriction to blood flow.
Unstable plaques, which are susceptible to rupture, are softer with a thinner fibrous cap.
Plaque rupture triggers the formation of a blood clot, which can block the flow of blood
through the artery. RBC: red blood cell; WBC: white blood cell.
Presentation Vascular event
Stable angina No plaque rupture, but symptomatic
or limiting stable occlusion
Acute coronary syndromes Plaque rupture with transient
(unstable angina/non-Q wave MI) or incomplete occlusion
MI Plaque rupture with complete occlusion
and tissue necrosis
Table 1.Subgroups of coronary artery disease presentations. MI: myocardial infarction.
The establishment of these pathophysiological origins of CAD, together with the
identification of improved clinical markers for ischemia and necrosis, has led to the
proposal of a new (somewhat controversial) definition for acute MI: a rise and fall
in troponin or the creatine kinase myocardial band fraction (CK-MB) (see “Markers
of myocardial damage” section), plus at least one of the following:
• ischemic symptoms
• development of pathological Q waves on the electrocardiogram (ECG)
• ST-segment elevation or depression on the ECG
• coronary artery intervention (eg, angioplasty)
46
--- Страница 58 ---
Coronary artery disease
ANGINA PECTORIS
William Heberden defined angina pectoris in 1768 and provided a clear
description of the familiar pain. However, it was Edward Jenner and Caleb
Parry who linked this “disorder of the breast” with the “hardening” of the
arteries that had been described by Giovanni Morgagni 7 years earlier.
Assessment
History and examination
History-taking is the most valuable technique for differentiating between the many
causes of chest discomfort. The classic symptoms of angina are well known: a
sensation of a constriction of the chest with variable levels of radiation to the neck,
jaw, both arms, and occasionally to the epigastrium or through to the back.
The pain is worse with exertion, especially in cold air; improved by rest and
nitrates; and often follows a meal. Retrosternal pain in particular (often described
by patients as “pressure”) suggests that angina is the cause. Pains that are localized
elsewhere, described as sharp or stabbing, or reproduced by palpation are much
less likely to be cardiac in origin.
The term “unstable angina” encompasses a number of presentations, including
pain that:
• occurs at rest
• lasts longer than 30 minutes
• is not relieved by several doses of sublingual nitrate
• is elicited over days or weeks by gradually smaller
amounts of exertion (crescendo angina)
Examination of the cardiovascular system is mandatory in any patient reporting
chest pain. Sweating, nausea, and vomiting are suggestive of MI, while
complications of MI – such as heart failure (third heart sound and basal crackles)
ventricular septal defect (VSD), harsh systolic murmur, or papillary muscle rupture
– should be excluded.
Atypical chest pain
A common presentation in general practice is chest pain accompanied by an atypical
history. In such cases, it is essential that the history is accurately established and
documented. The most common noncardiac cause is dyspepsia. Although chest
pain following a big meal could have a cardiac, gastroesophageal, or biliary origin,
pain resulting from exercise is rarely biliary. It may be difficult to differentiate
esophageal spasm from cardiac pain as they are both improved by nitrate.
Other noncardiac causes to consider are musculoskeletal, pericardial, and pleural.
47
--- Страница 59 ---
Chapter 5
Major independent Predisposing Possible risk factors
risk factors risk factors
Cigarette smoking Physical inactivitya Fibrinogen
Hypertension Obesitya C-reactive protein
Elevated total and Family history of premature Homocysteine
LDL cholesterol coronary disease Elevated Lp(a)
Low HDL cholesterol Ethnicity
Diabetes mellitus Psychosocial factors
Older age
Table 2.American Heart Association guide to risk factors for coronary artery disease.
HDL: high-density lipoprotein; LDL: low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a): lipoprotein little a.
aThese are classified as major by some bodies.
Other forms of angina include:
• variant angina (also known as Prinzmetal’s angina), which causes an
unpredictable pain – typically coming on at rest – and is associated
with transient ST elevation on an ECG. It is thought to be due to
coronary spasm and seems to be independent of atherosclerosis
• syndrome X – a condition in which the history is typical of coronary
disease and there is ST depression on exercise, yet the coronary
arteries are angiographically normal. It is thought to reflect small
vessel disease and/or abnormal ventricular function
• dyspnea– angina can present as exertional dyspnea. Pay close
attention to the pattern of onset and relief
• silent ischemia – diabetics, an important subgroup, can suffer from
silent ischemia and even silent MI. Thus, even if there are no apparent
symptoms of cardiac disease, a diabetic with an ECG abnormality
should undergo stress testing and echocardiography to determine whether
there is any indication for catheterization. One view is that all diabetics of
greater than 5 years standing should be screened for cardiovascular disease
The key message is that a patient with an atypical history should always be referred
for exercise electrocardiography (see “Investigations” section). In more than 90%
of cases, the existence of coronary disease can be predicted accurately from the
combined results of exercise ECG and their history.
Generalist management
Risk factors
Risk factor assessment and management are central to the care of cardiac patients.
The major independent and predisposing risk factors (see Tables 2 and3) should
be documented for every patient, and it is useful to include them in every referral.
48
--- Страница 60 ---
Coronary artery disease
Lifestyle Biochemical or Personal
physiological characteristics
characteristics (nonmodifiable)
(modifiable)
Diet high in Elevated blood pressure Older age
saturated fat,
Elevated plasma total Male gender
cholesterol, and
cholesterol (LDL cholesterol)
calories Family history of CHD
Low plasma HDL cholesterol or other atherosclerotic
Tobacco smoking
vascular disease at early
Elevated plasma triglycerides
Excess alcohol age (men <55 years,
consumption Hyperglycemia/diabetes women <65 years)
Physical inactivity Obesity Personal history of CHD
or other atherosclerotic
Thrombogenic factors
vascular disease
Table 3.European Society of Cardiology table of lifestyles and characteristics associated
with an increased risk of a future coronary heart disease (CHD) event. HDL: high-density
lipoprotein; LDL: low-density lipoprotein.
Smoking
There are a wealth of products aimed at smoking cessation. Older products
such as nicotine chewing gum have been replaced by nicotine patches and nicotine
inhalers, and many products have been shown to have clear benefits in helping people
to stop smoking. However, if someone is to succeed at giving up smoking, it is
important that certain vital support mechanisms are in place before they attempt it:
• it is essential that the patients’ families and partners are supportive
• patients should allocate a particular date and time to stop smoking.
This should be a few weeks subsequent to the decision to stop, to
allow time for planning and reflection
• patients should identify (and write down) the “at-risk” times
when they envisage that temptation and craving will be greatest,
for example with coffee or in a bar. They can then focus, in advance,
on these situations and devise a way to avoid giving in
• on the allotted date, patients should remove all cigarettes
and smoking materials from the house
• patients should keep diaries of their progress and
report regularly to their doctor
Most people can stop smoking using these techniques. In cases where it is not
successful, pharmacological help in the form of bupropion (Zyban) may be
indicated. Helping patients to stop smoking is an extremely worthwhile endeavor.
The risk tables (see Figures 2 and3) show just how much there is to be gained by
changing smoking status.
49
--- Страница 61 ---
Chapter 5
Men Women
Nonsmoker Smoker Nonsmoker Smoker
mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300
mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
70 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
60 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
50 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
40 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
30 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8
mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300
Cholesterol Cholesterol Cholesterol Cholesterol
10-year Very high (>40%)
risk level High (20%–40%)
Moderate (10%–20%)
Mild (5%–10%)
Low (<5%)
Figure 2.Coronary heart disease risk tables for men and women. Reproduced with
permission from the European Society of Cardiology (Prevention of coronary heart
disease in clinical practice. Recommendations of the Second Joint Task Force of
European and other Societies on coronary prevention. Eur Heart J1998;19:1434–503).
50
)gH
mm(
erusserp
doolb
cilotsyS
)gH
mm(
erusserp
doolb
cilotsyS
--- Страница 62 ---
Coronary artery disease
Men with diabetes Women with diabetes
Nonsmoker Smoker Nonsmoker Smoker
mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300
mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
70 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
60 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
50 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
40 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
180 – 180 – 180 – 180 –
AGE 160 – 160 – 160 – 160 –
30 140 – 140 – 140 – 140 –
120 – 120 – 120 – 120 –
mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8 mmol/L 4 5 6 7 8
mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300 mg/dL150 200 250 300
Cholesterol Cholesterol Cholesterol Cholesterol
10-year Very high (>40%)
risk level High (20%–40%)
Moderate (10%–20%)
Mild (5%–10%)
Low (<5%)
Figure 3.Coronary heart disease risk tables for men and women with diabetes.
Reproduced with permission from the European Society of Cardiology (Prevention
of coronary heart disease in clinical practice. Recommendations of the Second Joint
Task Force of European and other Societies on coronary prevention. Eur Heart J1998;
19:1434–503).
51
)gH
mm(
erusserp
doolb
cilotsyS
)gH
mm(
erusserp
doolb
cilotsyS
--- Страница 63 ---
Chapter 5
Basic science
Exercise training exerts many beneficial changes at the cellular and molecular level.
An exercise-induced increase in blood flow may exert its beneficial effects on vascular
reactivity and structure through an increase in the elaboration of several endothelium-
derived substances, such as nitric oxide, prostacyclin, and superoxide dismutase.
Although prostacyclin may exert its antiatherogenic effects by inhibiting the uptake of
cholesterol esters into macrophages or into smooth muscle cells, nitric oxide
contributes strongly to the inhibition of monocyte adhesion, and inhibits platelet
aggregation at much lower concentrations than those needed to inhibit adhesion,
thereby allowing platelets to participate in the repair of the vessel wall, while at the
same time preventing or limiting thrombus formation.
Flow also modulates the expression of numerous paracrine substances, including
endothelial growth factors, matrix modulators, chemokines, and regulators of blood
fluidity, all of which may participate in the beneficial effects of exercise-induced
vascular remodeling and reactivity.
Finally, exercise-induced changes in flow also have other antiatherogenic effects.
Endothelial cells exposed to shear stress elaborate less superoxide anion; this may in
part be due to increased transcription of superoxide dismutase. There are also shear
stress responsive elements in the promoter region of several adhesion molecules
(eg, intercellular adhesion molecule) that may reduce their gene expression.
Diet
The central components of a healthy diet are well known: low in fat; low in salt;
low in cholesterol; low in calories. In detail, patients should consume a diet high
in fiber (>20 g/day), and low in fat (<10% of total amount of calories) and
cholesterol (<300 mg/day). However, helping patients to achieve this is another
matter. Dieticians and specialist nurses can give patients the advice and support
they need to improve their diet.
Physical activity
It is very important that an increase in physical activity accompanies an improved
diet and giving up smoking. Exercise can be an enjoyable undertaking for patients.
It can help them to:
• improve their mood
• feel more energetic
• be less restricted in what they eat
• relax more
• sleep better
• take a break from their normal routine
52
--- Страница 64 ---
Coronary artery disease
With these benefits, it is surprising that anyone needs to be persuaded to exercise.
Major bodies, led by the American College of Sports Medicine, recommend
that patients exercise for 30 minutes on at least 3days per week at a submaximal
exercise intensity. However, exercise does not have to comprise formal exercise;
it can include informal exercise, provided it is of adequate intensity. In this way,
increases in physical activity can be absorbed into everyday life: for example,
climbing the stairs instead of taking the elevator and walking to work instead
of driving. In fact, walking, partly because it is so inefficient, is excellent exercise.
Few people realize that walking a mile and running a mile use similar amounts
of energy. Thus, there is no need for patients to join a gym (with all the expense
that may be incurred) when daily brisk walking is ample exercise. Keeping a
diary of their physical activity may help patients to sustain adequate amounts of
daily exercise.
Submaximal aerobic exercise in angina
Many angina patients refrain from physical activity because they believe that
the resulting pain is “dangerous”. However, aside from its well-known benefits in
risk reduction, exercise can be as effective as b-blockade in the management of
stable angina. It has been associated with increased plaque stability and even slight
plaque shrinkage. It is recommended that patients exercise for 30–45minutes per
day, 4–5times a week.
Estimating risk
Formal risk estimation is aided by a standard set of tables that were developed
using epidemiological data gathered over many years (see Figures 2 and 3).
These tables are based on:
• gender
• age
• presence of diabetes
• smoking
• systolic blood pressure
• total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein (HDL) ratio
Investigations
Electrocardiogram
The ECG is a vital tool for assessing patients in both stable and emergency
situations. Nevertheless, generalists in primary care do not always have ready
access to it. Any patient presenting with clear cardiac chest pain should undergo
an ECG immediately or as soon as possible (preferably even before a history is
taken) to identify whether they are at high risk, ie, ST segment change or new left
bundle branch block (LBBB). This facilitates prompt referral when necessary and,
for thrombolysis, a door-to-needle time of less than 30 minutes. However, the ECG
53
--- Страница 65 ---
Chapter 5
is not absolute– ST-segment elevation is present in only 50% of enzyme-confirmed
MIs (see “Markers of myocardial damage” section).
Chest radiograph
A chest x-ray (CXR) may be used to help rule out aortic dissection in an
acute presentation, although the gold standard is computed tomography (CT).
Otherwise, it is rarely helpful. It should not be carried out on a routine basis.
Pharmacological management of angina
Stable disease is treated with aspirin and agents that offload or reduce the workload
of the heart. Thus, standard medication for stable angina includes b-blockers,
aspirin, and, if still symptomatic, long-acting nitrates.
Aspirin
The evidence for aspirin is so strong that it has to be part of the drug regimen of
every patient with CAD. If aspirin is not tolerated, clopidogrel may be given
instead. In cases in which warfarin (Coumadin) has to be administered (eg,
coronary disease and atrial fibrillation), aspirin is usually omitted, since oral
anticoagulation with an international normalized ratio (INR) of 3–4 has been
shown to be safe and effective.
Oral long-acting nitrate
Nitrates are smooth muscle relaxants with the ability to vasodilate both the
arteriolar and venous circulation. This leads to reductions in both preload (venous
return) and afterload (blood pressure). However, nitrate-free periods are necessary
to avoid tolerance.
Beta-blockers and calcium-channel blockers
Beta-blockers work by reducing the heart rate (lengthening diastole increases the
time for coronary perfusion) and reducing the effects of catecholamine-mediated
increases in cardiac workload. Calcium-channel blockers cause coronary artery
dilation and subsequently decrease cardiac workload by reducing the contractility
of myocardial smooth muscle cells. Calcium-channel blockers can be divided into
rate-limiting (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) and nonrate-limiting (dihydropyridines,
eg, amlodipine). Dihydropyridines are generally prescribed for hypertension,
whereas the others tend to be used in cases of angina because of their ability to
reduce the heart rate. However, verapamil should not be used with b-blockers,
which block the action of sympathetic hormones (resulting in a lower heart rate
and blood pressure) (see Chapter 6, Hypertension).
54
--- Страница 66 ---
Coronary artery disease
Potassium-channel openers
Potassium-channel openers, such as nicorandil, are a new class of agents for the
treatment of angina. They exert both direct action on cardiac mitochondria and a
nitrate-like effect. These are not yet available in the US.
Lipid-lowering agents
Lipids are insoluble in water. Hence, they are transported around the body as
lipoproteins. Lipoproteins are made up of cholesterol, triglycerides, phospholipids,
and protein. The major classes of lipoproteins (which vary in density, size, and
triglyceride/cholesterol ratio) are:
• chylomicrons (the largest and least dense)
• very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs)
• low-density lipoproteins (LDLs)
• HDLs
Lipids originate from two sources: endogenous lipids, synthesized in the liver, and
exogenous lipids, ingested and processed in the intestine (see Figure 4).
Dietary cholesterol and triglycerides are packaged into chylomicrons in the intestine,
before passing into the bloodstream via lymphatics. Chylomicrons are broken down
by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) in the capillaries of muscle and adipose tissue to fatty
acids, which then enter the cells. The chylomicron remnants, which have lost much
of their triglyceride content, are taken up by the liver for disposal.
The liver synthesizes triglycerides and cholesterol, and packages them as VLDLs
before releasing them into the blood. When VLDLs (which consist mainly of
triglyceride) reach muscle and adipose blood vessels, their triglycerides are
hydrolyzed by LPL to fatty acids. The fatty acids that are released are taken up by
the surrounding muscle and adipose cells. During this process, the VLDLs become
progressively more dense and turn into LDLs. While most of the resulting LDLs are
taken up by the liver for disposal, some circulate and distribute cholesterol to the
rest of the body tissues.
HDLs, which are also secreted from the liver and intestine, have the task of
preventing lipid accumulation. They remove surplus cholesterol from tissues and
transfer it to LDLs that return it to the liver.
To regulate cholesterol uptake, cells vary the expression of their LDL receptors.
Elevated concentrations of lipid (hyperlipidemia) can lead to the development of
atherosclerosis and CAD. VLDLs and LDLs are atherogenic lipoproteins, whereas
HDL concentrations are inversely related to the incidence of CAD. Hence,
55
--- Страница 67 ---
Chapter 5
Intestine
Liver
HMG-CoA
Bile duct Cholestyramine
BA
Statins
Hepatic portal vessels
TG Chol Chol TG
Fibrates
VLDL
Chylo
LPL LPL
HDL
LDL Chylo
rem
HDL+ FA
Chol
Muscle and
adipose tissue
Blood vessel
Figure 4.Lipid transport and pharmacotherapeutic agents in hyperlipidemia (see
“Lipid-lowering agents” text). BA: bile acid; Chol: cholesterol; Chylo: chylomicron;
Chylo rem: chylomicronremnant; FA: fatty acid; HDL: high-density lipoprotein;
HMG-CoA: hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase; LDL: low-density lipoprotein;
LPL: lipoprotein lipase; TG: triglyceride; VLDL: very low-density lipoprotein.
treatments for hyperlipidemia aim to reduce LDL levels and raise HDL levels.
Pharmacotherapeutic options in hyperlipidemia include:
• statins, which inhibit hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
(HMG-CoA), the rate-limiting enzyme of cholesterol synthesis in the
liver. A reduction in cholesterol synthesis causes the liver to increase
the number of LDL receptors, reducing circulating concentrations
of both cholesterol and triglyceride
• cholestyramine, which is a lipid-lowering drug that acts by sequestering
bile acids in the gut, thus increasing the synthesis of bile acids
from cholesterol
• fibrates, which reduce the level of VLDL by increasing the activity
of the VLDL-hydrolyzing enzyme LPL
56
--- Страница 68 ---
Coronary artery disease
Guidelines for the use of lipid-lowering therapy have become more aggressive over
the past few years following the results of major trials showing mortality benefit for
the use of statins. Most guidelines recommend statin treatment for a patient with
CAD with a 10-year risk that is greater than 20% (high risk) once a trial of dietary
therapy has been unsuccessful. However, treatment can be cost effective with a
10-year risk of 10%. Recent trials have identified anti-inflammatory properties of
statins and benefit even in patients with normal cholesterol levels. Dosage should
be adjusted according to cholesterol levels. As part of secondary prevention, the
following levels should be reached: total cholesterol, <200 mg/dL (5.2 mmol/L);
HDL, >40 mg/dL (1 mmol/L); LDL, <100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L); triglyceride,
<200mg/dL (2.3 mmol/L).
Refer with confidence
Early management of stable coronary disease is mostly done in the community.
Risk factor and stepwise pharmacological management of stable angina are
appropriate. If there is any doubt about the diagnosis, a noninvasive test for
coronary disease – such as an exercise ECG – should be carried out. Exercise ECG
is increasingly carried out by generalists in primary care and hospitals. Pain that is
resistant to medical therapy or crescendo symptoms warrants immediate
presentation to an emergency room to rule out MI. The patient should then be
referred to a cardiologist for further investigation, if needed. When referring
patients who have had prior intervention, try to summarize the details of previous
revascularization. For example:
• two-vessel disease (left anterior descending [LAD], circumflex artery)
• previous left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to LAD,
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) to
right coronary artery (RCA)
• previous saphenous vein graft (SVG) to circumflex artery
Including this type of detail will greatly increase the usefulness of a referral letter.
Specialist management
Stable angina: assessment
Exercise electrocardiography
Exercise ECG is the mainstay test for the diagnosis of CAD. It is usually carried out
on a treadmill, but bicycle exercise can also be used. The patient exercises according
to a set protocol from rest to maximum exertion, which should be reached in
8–12 minutes. The protocol most commonly used was originally described by
Robert Bruce and bears his name (see Figure 5). There are, however, good reasons
to consider a protocol that is individualized for each patient. Diagnostic exercise
57
--- Страница 69 ---
Chapter 5
(a) Gradient (%) 10 12 14 16 18
Speed (km/h) 2.7 4.0 5.4 6.7 8.0
Time (min)0 3 6 9 12 15
(b) Gradient (%) 0 5 10 12 14
Speed (km/h) 2.7 2.7 2.7 4 5.4
Time (min)0 3 6 9 12 15
Figure 5.(a)The Bruce exercise protocol. The patient starts exercising at a speed of
2.7km/h on a gradient of 10%. The workload is intensified every 3 minutes by increasing
the speed and the incline of the treadmill, until the endpoint is achieved. (b)The modified
Bruce exercise protocol is less intense to start with and is used to assess frailer patients,
such as the elderly or those who have suffered a myocardial infarction.
tests focus predominantly on the ST segment, which must fall more than 1 mm
from rest and be horizontal or downsloping to be significant. ST depression does not
localize ischemia so it cannot reveal anything about a suspected coronary lesion, but
it does enable a classification of mild, intermediate, or severe CAD to be made.
The exercise test is also useful for recording other variables, ie, work capacity;
maximum heart rate and chronotropic incompetence; blood pressure rise and
recovery; and heart rate recovery. Work capacity (presumably reflecting left
ventricular [LV] function) and heart rate recovery are very strong prognostic
indicators for CAD. Contraindications to exercise testing and reasons for stopping
an exercise test are outlined in Table 4.
It is important to appreciate where the value of the exercise test lies:
• exercise ECG on its own has low sensitivity (<50%) but high
specificity (>90%) – ie, it is very good at ruling disease in, but
not good at ruling it out
• the meaning of the test results is significantly affected by the
pretest probability of disease (see Table 5). For example,
exercise-induced ST depression in a young woman with no
risk factors is likely to be a false positive
• incorporating clinical and demographic information into the
basic test result by calculating diagnostic “scores” can increase
the sensitivity and specificity to >90% (see Figure 6)
• patients without a clear diagnosis from the exercise tolerance
test should have another noninvasive test
58
--- Страница 70 ---
Coronary artery disease
Contraindications to Reasons for stopping
exercise testing an exercise test
Unstable angina Development of anginal symptoms
Left main stem disease Fall >15 mm Hg or failure to
Acute myocarditis or pericarditis increase systolic blood pressure
Untreated congestive cardiac failure Arrhythmia development – ventricular
in particular
Evidence of pyrexial or “flu”-like
illnesses An ST-segment depression of >2 mm in
chest leads or >1 mm in limb leads
Severe aortic stenosis or HCM with
marked outflow obstruction
Dissecting aneurysm
Adults with complete heart block
Untreated severe hypertension
LBBB (the test is nondiagnostic)
Table 4.Contraindications to and reasons for stopping an exercise test. HCM: hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy; LBBB: left bundle branch block.
Age Nonanginal Atypical Typical
(years) chest pain angina angina
Men Women Men Women Men Women
30–39 4 2 34 12 76 26
40–49 13 3 51 22 87 55
50–59 20 7 65 31 93 73
60–69 27 14 72 51 94 86
Table 5.Pretest likelihood of coronary artery disease (CAD) in symptomatic patients
according to age and sex – each value represents the percentage of patients found to
have significant CAD on catheterization. Reproduced with permission from Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins (Gibbons RJ, Chatterjee K, Daley J et al. ACC/AHA/ACP-ASIM
Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Chronic Stable Angina: Executive
Summary and Recommendations. Circulation1999;99:2829–48).
A diagnostic algorithm for CAD is outlined in Figure 7. Most guidelines suggest
the use of an alternative test if the preprobability is low. If the preprobability
is high, exercise testing adds little in the way of diagnosis, but is useful for risk
stratification. The primary role of exercise testing is where preprobability is intermediate.
Nuclear cardiology
Isotopes such as thallium-201 or technetium (Tc)-99m can be used to provide
information on cardiac function.
59
--- Страница 71 ---
Chapter 5
ST-segment Ischemia- Angina during Prognosis Duration of
deviation during reading exercise exercise
Average
exercise line 5-year annual
survival mortality MET Min
0 mm None 0.99 0.2% 20 18
0.98 0.4%
17 15
0.95 1% 13 12
Nonlimiting 0.93 1.5%
10 9
1 mm 0.90 2%
0.85 3% 7 6
0.80 4%
0.75 5%
Exercise-limiting 0.70 6% 5 3
0 0
0.55 9%
2 mm
3 mm
4 mm
Figure 6.The Duke score, which is the most commonly used risk score, can be used for
diagnosis as well as prognosis. To use this nomogram: determine (i) the maximum amount of
downsloping or planar ST depression, and (ii) the type of angina during exercise. Connect these
to give a point on the ischemia reading line. Then connect this point to the MET level (or
duration of the Bruce protocol). Where this line dissects the prognosis line gives an estimate of
risk. MET: metabolic unit – 1 MET equates to resting metabolic rate (typically 3.5mL/kg/min).
Perfusion imaging is used to assess regional blood flow by comparing the relative
distribution of isotope at rest and under conditions of stress. Stress is provided
either by exercise or by pharmacological tools such as inotropes (eg, dobutamine)
or vasodilators (eg, adenosine or dipyridamole). The isotope is injected at the peak
of exercise and the image captured with a gamma camera. Rest images are usually
achieved several hours later. The “exercise” and “rest” images are compared to
identify perfusion defects that are either “fixed” (eg, the scar of an old MI)
or “reversible” (ischemic disease). Thallium-201 has been the isotope of choice
for many years, but more recently centers have been using Tc-99m-labeled
compounds, such as sestamibi, which achieve a higher resolution from a
lower dose of radiation. Single photon emission CT (SPECT) is a technique that
employs a gamma camera head that rotates around the patient to provide
three-dimensional images.
Isotopes are also used in ventriculography. Estimates of LV function arrived at using
this imaging technique are more accurate and reproducible than those resulting
from echo. Consequently, ventriculography is indicated in:
60
--- Страница 72 ---
Coronary artery disease
Suspicion of
coronary disease
Preprobability
Low Intermediate High
Exercise treadmill test and
diagnostic/prognostic score
Stress echo Cardiac
Scintigraphy catheterization
MRI
Figure 7.Diagnostic algorithm for coronary artery disease. MRI: magnetic resonance imaging.
• cardiomyopathy assessment
• pretransplant work-up
• any situation where accurate risk assessment is critical
Two types of protocol are used: equilibrium and first-pass. The former, which is
more common, uses a sample of the patient’s blood labeled with Tc-99m.
Information is gathered from each heartbeat over the time of equilibration (a few
minutes) then averaged to give the final reading. In the first-pass technique, a bolus
of radionuclide is injected and information is gathered over a much shorter time
with a fast gamma camera.
Stress echocardiography
Stress echo is gaining in popularity because it has:
• a higher predictive value than exercise ECG
• a lower cost and better safety profile than perfusion scintigraphy
Ultrasound is used to detect the difference in wall movement between ischemic
and nonischemic myocardium (nonischemic myocardium moves less).
Furthermore, the location of the wall-motion abnormalities enables the coronary
61
--- Страница 73 ---
Chapter 5
disease pattern to be predicted – this is not possible from ST-segment depression
on an exercise ECG. Stress echo is thus indicated when:
• LBBB is present on the resting ECG
• the exercise ECG is inconclusive for other reasons
• immobility or lung disease precludes the practical use of exercise
as a cardiac stress (pharmacological stress echo only)
Stress echo can also provide information on stunned or hibernating myocardium.
The former is myocardium that after a period of acute ischemia and reperfusion
remains, for a time, hypokinetic at rest. Hibernating myocardium is a more chronic
situation in which the blood flow of a segment is not adequate for function,
yet is sufficient for it to remain viable. During periods of stress, these areas of
myocardium “recover” and their viability can be detected as improvements (compared
with at rest) in segmental contraction on exposure to low-dose pharmacological stress.
Stress echo is a useful technique in the hands of an experienced operator in a
patient with a good echo window. Views can also be greatly improved by the use
of a supine bicycle.
Electron beam computed tomography
This is a new technique that relies on imaging calcium in coronary lesions. It can
quantify the “atherosclerotic burden” in the form of a calcium score to give an
estimate of risk or to monitor the effect of, for example, lipid-lowering therapy.
However, there is some doubt over how much information this measure adds to
standard risk factors. Furthermore, vulnerable plaque often does not contain much
calcium. The “holy grail” is a test that can locate and quantify “vulnerable” plaque,
but this has not yet been found.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Most cardiologists agree that the future of noninvasive imaging of the heart lies
with MRI. This technology can fulfill many of the functions of traditional tests and
in most cases improve on them:
• cardiac anatomy and morphology can be assessed with a high
degree of spatial resolution using “black-blood” imaging
• in cine mode (like two-dimensional echo), resolutions can be achieved
that are significantly greater than those obtained with ultrasound
and good views can be imaged and processed in under 30seconds
• LV function – including under exercise/pharmacological
stress – can be achieved with a single breath-hold and the
circumferential shortening calculated
62
--- Страница 74 ---
Coronary artery disease
• wall-motion abnormalities can be assessed using tagging techniques
• perfusion imaging can be carried out with a single breath-hold
and two R–R intervals
In fact, the only technique that is still some way from routine clinical application
is magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the coronary vessels (larger vessel
MRA has been possible for some time). However, as new technology moves the
field forward, this is likely to become more attainable, and with it the tempting
prospect of cross-sectional imaging and plaque characterization.
Stable angina: treatment
Cardiac catheterization
Since cardiac MRI is still only available in the bigger centers, coronary artery
catheterization remains the diagnostic gold standard in CAD. As the conduit for
coronary intervention, its position is also safe from advances in imaging
technology. Catheterization can also be used in a variety of settings aside from
CAD, such as ventricular dysfunction, valve disease, detection and quantification
of shunts, and other congenital and acquired structural abnormalities.
The basic procedure of PTCA involves cannulation of the femoral artery, with
manipulation of a catheter over a guide wire to the site of stenosis. Dye is injected
into each coronary artery in turn to assess flow. Flow is graded using a system first
put forward by the TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) investigators
(see Table 6). In balloon angioplasty a balloon is inflated (using the image-
enhancing contrast dye) to compress the atheroma and dilate the artery (see
Figure 8). Until recently, this was the intervention of choice. However, balloon
angioplasty has a restenosis rate of 30% over 6 months and a high rate of coronary
artery dissection. Consequently, the use of coronary artery stents (see Figure 8),
which have lower rates of restenosis and artery dissection, has become common
practice. These are deployed using a balloon. Most recent work has focussed on
drug-eluting stents (which elute anti-inflammatory or anti-proliferative agents),
which seem dramatically to reduce the incidence of restenosis.
PIONEERS
In 1929, Werner Forssmann – a German cardiologist – went against the express
advice of his boss and, with the help of a nurse, inserted a catheter through an
arm vein into his own heart. This was the first time a human heart had ever been
catheterized. He saw the successful catheterization images on a fluoroscope
screen – only by using a mirror. A pioneer of cardiology, he published his paper
in Klinische Wochenschrift in 1929 and, although he catheterized only one
patient’s heart, he went on to catheterize his own heart another eight times.
63
--- Страница 75 ---
Chapter 5
Contrast flow TIMI grade
Prompt anterograde flow and rapid clearing 3
Slowed distal filling but full opacification of distal vessel 2
Small amount of flow but incomplete opacification of distal vessel 1
No contrast flow 0
Table 6.System (devised by the TIMI [Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction]
investigators) used to grade the flow of contrast dye that has been injected into
coronary arteries during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.
Other, less common percutaneous techniques include radioactive stents and
atherectomy (where the atheroma is physically removed from the artery).
Insertion of a metal object into an artery is a prothrombotic event. Hence, stenting
is carried out in conjunction with antithrombotic therapy. Infusional
antithrombotic agents (eg, abciximab – see below) are used as an adjunct during
angioplasty while oral antiplatelet agents, such as ticlopidine and clopidogrel, are
used for 1 month post stent. (However, ticlopidine has been plagued by problems
of bone marrow suppression.)
Abciximab – a chimeric murine–human Fab1fragment monoclonal antibody – and
the small molecule inhibitors tirofiban and eptifibatide are members of a new class
of antithrombotics. These agents function by inhibiting glycoprotein (GP)IIb/IIIa,
a receptor abundant on platelets. When platelets are activated, this receptor binds
fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor, leading to platelet aggregation.
The benefit from these agents almost certainly relates to microembolization since:
• there is good evidence from autopsy studies that, following
spontaneous or instrumented coronary plaque disruption, small
aggregates of platelets, cholesterol, or other plaque material can be
found in distal microvessels
• it has been demonstrated, using filter devices and contrast echo, that
microembolization is common following percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) and is almost certainly the basis of “no reflow” – when
perfusion is limited following PCI despite adequate restoration of flow in the
infarct-related artery
• troponin levels, which are thought to be a sensitive marker for this type
of damage, are elevated following approximately 40% of procedures.
(Note that, in unstable angina, the benefit of GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors is
not limited to those with elevated troponin levels.)
64
--- Страница 76 ---
Coronary artery disease
Deployed stent
Guidewire
Contrast dye
inflates balloon
Atheroma
Figure 8.Balloon angioplasty is used to compress atherosclerotic narrowing and dilate
the artery. A balloon is directed over a guidewire to the site of stenosis where it is
inflated (by contrast medium) to push open the narrowing or deploy the stent.
Overall, complications from cardiac catheterization are relatively rare (totaling
~5%). They include:
• contrast allergy response (very rare due to modern dyes)
• local hemorrhage from puncture sites with subsequent thrombosis
• false aneurysm or arteriovenous (AV) malformation
• vasovagal reactions
• coronary dissection
• aortic dissection or ventricular perforation
• air or atheroma embolism, which can occur in either the coronary
or other arterial circulations with consequent ischemia or stroke
• ventricular dysrhythmias, which are seen and may even cause death
in the setting of left main stem disease
65
--- Страница 77 ---
Chapter 5
THE FIRST HUMAN CORONARY ANGIOGRAM
The first human coronary angiogram was, in fact, carried out by mistake by
Mason Sones of the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, USA, in 1958. Carrying out a
standard LV angiogram, he paused – leaving the catheter in the aorta – to have
a midprocedure smoke with his second operator. He returned, and relying on a
pressure reading rather than direct visualization to determine the position of the
catheter, he injected the RCA instead of the left ventricle. Realizing the mistake
immediately from the outline of the RCA on the fluoroscope screen, he rapidly
removed the catheter – just as his patient arrested. Hesitating, with scalpel in
hand prepared for open chest defibrillation, he noticed the rhythm was asystole
and not ventricular fibrillation. Thinking he might be able to help clear the dye
without resorting to direct application of the paddles onto the myocardium, he
pounded his patient’s chest shouting “Cough! Cough!” Perhaps it was a cough,
or maybe the precordial thump, or perhaps even its repeated applicationa that
restarted the patient’s heart, but certainly the fact that the patient recovered was
the spark that ignited a revolution in diagnostic medicine.
(aPresaging CPR – a technique not practiced for several years subsequently.)
Overall mortality rates are quoted at less than one in 1,000 cases, but this
increases to one in 100 for higher risk cases.
Coronary artery bypass grafting
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is the technique of choice for three-vessel
disease with depressed LV function and left main stem coronary disease. However,
since coronary interventions have become much more sophisticated some studies
have shown equal benefit from percutaneous treatment as compared with surgical
treatment in patients with three-vessel disease. During surgery, the patient undergoes
sternotomy followed by heart–lung bypass and cardiac arrest. A portion of the
saphenous vein is dissected from the leg, reversed (to orientate the venous valves in
the appropriate direction), and attached proximally to the aortic root and distally to
the coronary artery (see Figure 9). The LIMA, which originates from the left
subclavian artery, can also be used as a conduit. It is disconnected at its distal end
only and the cut end is connected to the LAD. In the same way, the right internal
mammary artery (RIMA) can be connected to the RCA. A clear benefit of LIMA/RIMA
CABG is improved graft patency, both perioperatively and in the long term (10years).
Other arteries that can be used include the radial and the gastroepiploic.
Due to the risks of heart–lung bypass – such as postbypass cognitive deficit – some
centers now practice beating heart surgery. In this procedure the heart is not arrested:
the section of the heart that is to be operated on is stabilized locally by the “suckers”
(vacuum-operated suction clamps) of a device known as an octopus. Another
technique is minimally invasive bypass, which uses small incisions and LIMA grafts.
66
--- Страница 78 ---
Coronary artery disease
Left internal
mammary graft
Left main stem
Saphenous Circumflex artery
vein graft
Left anterior
descending artery
Conus
Septal branch
SA nodal
branch Diagonal branch
Right Obtuse marginal
coronary branch
artery
Septal branch
Right
posterolateral
branch
Marginal
branch
Posterior
descending
artery
Figure 9.Sites of heart bypass grafting: a saphenous vein graft and a left internal
mammary artery graft are shown.
Evidence base
With these rapid advances in both surgical and percutaneous techniques, much of
the evidence base is out of date. For example, there are no definitive data indicating
that angioplasty saves lives in stable CAD. Previous trials have shown that CABG can
benefit outcome in: symptomatic, significant left main stem disease; symptomatic
proximal three-vessel disease; and two-vessel disease including the proximal LAD.
Patients with moderately impaired LV function benefit more from CABG than those
with poor LV function, who have greater operative mortality (overall mortality is
around 2.8%, but rises to 3.7%–12% for an emergency procedure).
Most cardiologists believe that new trials will demonstrate a mortality benefit for
coronary stenting, possibly for three-vessel disease and perhaps even over and
above that of bypass.
67
--- Страница 79 ---
Chapter 5
Marker Initial Peak Return to Notes
rise normal
Troponin I/T 2–4 h 10–24 h 5–10 d Troponin I and T are sensitive
and specific markers (unlike
troponin C). Their blood level
clearly relates to risk and thus
they represent a powerful tool
for risk stratification
Creatine kinasea 3–4 h 10–24 h 2–4 d CK-MB is the main
cardiac isoenzyme
Lactate 10 h 24–72 h 14 d Myocardium mainly
dehydrogenase has LDH1
Myoglobin 1–2 h 4–8 h 24 h Convenient early marker
due to availability of assay,
but not cardiac specific
Heart fatty-acid 1.5 h 5–10 h 24 h Undergoing evaluation
binding proteins
Table 7.Timescales for the variation in levels of markers for myocardial damage.
CK-MB: creatine kinase myocardial band fraction; LDH1: lactate dehydrogenase 1.
aCreatine kinase has three isoenzymes, of which CK-MB is the most cardiac specific.
However, other organs also possess this enzyme in small quantities. It has been suggested
that a CK-MB/CK ratio of over 2.5 is very specific for myocardial infarction in the context
of chest pain. However, even this is inaccurate in situations of significant acute or chronic
skeletal injury, where CK levels are also high.
Acute coronary syndromes: assessment
Risk assessment is the key to in-hospital management of acute coronary syndromes
(ACS). Patients with ST elevation need to be considered immediately for
thrombolysis or acute intervention. Other patients should be closely monitored
(preferably in a coronary care unit) if they have risk factors, previous infarction, poor
ventricular function, and changing ST segments. In this situation, the key
investigation is the measurement of cardiac enzymes.
Markers of myocardial damage
A number of markers for not only infarction, but also noninfarct ischemia, are now
available. The transaminases aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) no longer offer any advantage over the other markers and
in fact often cause false-positive results. Timescales of the variation in levels of the
most commonly used markers for myocardial damage are outlined in Table 7 and
Figure 10. Of the markers in Table 7, troponin I or T are the most specific and
sensitive markers to rule acute MI out or in.
68
--- Страница 80 ---
Coronary artery disease
7
Myoglobin
Total CK
6
CK-MB
5 LDH
Troponin I
4
3
2
0 20 40 60 80 100 12 140 160
Hours from onset of infarction
Figure 10.Appearance of cardiac markers in the blood after onset of symptoms.
CK: creatine kinase; CK-MB: creatine kinase myocardial band fraction; LDH:lactate
dehydrogenase.
Acute coronary syndromes: treatment
Pharmacological agents
The first-line treatment of any ACS is oxygen, aspirin, heparin, and b-blockade.
Clopidogrel is an alternative to aspirin and diltiazem is an alternative to
b-blockade. Low molecular-weight heparins have advantages over heparin, such as:
• simple administration
• better bioavailability
• no requirement for monitoring
• enhanced antifactor Xa activity
• lower rates of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)
Nitrates can be given intravenously for closer control of pain, unless there is
hypotension or suspicion of a posterior infarction that needs higher filling
pressures. Tolerance to nitrates occurs very quickly (24–36 hours) so the quicker
the infusion can be weaned, the better. Opiate analgesia is also used for pain.
In both cases, there may be benefit from GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors (see above).
Patients with positive troponin levels should undergo immediate catheterization.
Otherwise, patients should rest until they are pain-free. After 48 hours without
pain, patients should undergo cardiac catheterization.
69
lamron
fo
timil
reppU
x
--- Страница 81 ---
Chapter 5
Myocardial infarction
If MI is confirmed by history and ST elevation (1 mm in limb leads, 2 mm in chest
leads, or new LBBB) or elevated troponin plus either of these, the patient must
quickly be taken to the catheterization laboratory. If this facility is not available, the
doctor should immediately: (1) rule out contraindications to thrombolysis
(see “Thrombolysis” section) and (2) arrange for analgesia and thrombolysis to be
set up, before (3) completing the history and examination.
Primary PTCA
Recently – primarily due to improvements in devices, adjunctive therapy
(GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors), and user experience – in cases of acute MI, the superiority
of PTCA over thrombolysis alone has become clear. Most lesions (80%) are suitable
for PTCA, particularly if they are discrete, proximal, uncalcified, subtotally
occluded, without thrombus, and away from the side branches or divisions of a
vessel. As such, primary PTCA is the procedure of choice for patients within
12hours of the onset of MI symptoms. Current evidence suggests that patients of
less than 75 years with cardiogenic shock (occurring within 36 hours of MI) benefit
most from primary PTCA (within 18 hours of onset of shock) in an appropriate
center with experienced personnel. In cases of poor LV function, intra-aortic
balloon pumping (see Chapter 7, Heart failure) is useful in the setting of proximal
LAD or mainstem stenting.
Thrombolysis
Thrombolysis is given as an infusion of (typically) streptokinase or tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) over 30 minutes to 1 hour, depending on the protocol.
Aspirin and (intravenous) b-blocker should also be given acutely. Thrombolysis is
beneficial up to 12 hours after the onset of pain, but may be given up to 24 hours
afterwards in the context of continuing pain or a deteriorating condition.
The choice of thrombolytic agent is controversial. tPA and similar recombinant
agents are still from 5-to 7-times more expensive than streptokinase and thus only
tend to be used in the following situations:
• where streptokinase has been administered previously
• where recent proven streptococcal throat infections have occurred
• in cases of hypotension
However, even with large anterior MI in younger patients presenting within 4 hours
(a situation where tPA is often recommended first-line), the absolute added
mortality benefit is only 1% above streptokinase.
Intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) can be an important complication of thrombolysis.
Since heparin is associated with an increased risk of ICH (streptokinase treatment
70
--- Страница 82 ---
Coronary artery disease
has a lower rate of ICH when it is administered without heparin), there is particular
concern with respect to the administration of tPA (as it is usually given with
heparin) to hypertensive patients above 65 years of age who are less than 70 kg in
weight. Partly as a result of these concerns, several centers have explored the use
of low-dose thrombolytic treatment in combination with GPIIb/IIIa inhibition. The
results of these trials have been encouraging.
Recanalization is achieved following thrombolysis in approximately 70% of cases
(compared with 15% of cases without thrombolysis). As this leaves a significant
minority needing further attention, all patients should be reviewed 2 hours
following thrombolysis. Rethrombolysis or coronary intervention should be
considered if there is no resolution in the ST segment.
There are few absolute contraindications to thrombolysis and risks must
be weighed against benefits in each individual case, particularly in the face of a
large anterior infarct in a patient where access to primary PTCA is unavailable.
However, there are some absolute contraindications and some notable
relative contraindications.
Absolute contraindications are:
• suspected aortic dissection (demands urgent CT, which is the gold
standard, MRI, or transesophageal echo)
• active internal bleeding or uncontrollable external bleeding (excluding menses)
• recent head trauma (<2 weeks)
• intracranial neoplasms
• history of proven hemorrhagic stroke or cerebral infarction
within 12 months
• untreated diabetic hemorrhagic/proliferative retinopathy
• BP >180/110mm Hg uncontrolled (reduce with nitrates,
b-blockade, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors)
Relative contraindications are:
• pregnancy
• traumatic prolonged CPR
• anticoagulation or INR >1.8
• bleeding disorders
• recent surgery (within 3 weeks)
• probable intracardiac thrombus (eg, atrial fibrillation with mitral stenosis)
• active peptic ulcer
71
--- Страница 83 ---
Chapter 5
Basic science
Atherosclerosis is initiated by a combination of circulating factors, such as cholesterol,
and hemodynamic forces (common sites for atherosclerosis are areas where arteries
branch). LDL and circulating leukocytes penetrate the arterial wall at regions of high
shear stress (turbulent flow). In its atherogenic oxidized form, LDL enters
macrophages, converting them to foam cells in the process. Oxidized LDL also
enhances the growth factor-mediated migration of monocytes and smooth muscle
cells to the intima, where the latter differentiate to form the fibrous cap of the mature
atherosclerotic plaque. Figure 11shows the layers of a vessel wall.
As a result of our understanding of these processes, there is much experimental
interest in factors that contribute to the attraction and adhesion of leukocytes
(chemokines and adhesion molecules), the receptors that modulate LDL uptake
(scavenger receptors), enzymes that degrade the cap (matrix metalloproteinases), and
protective species (such as nitric oxide). With inflammation a central component of our
current appreciation of atherosclerosis, there is much interest in circulating markers
(such as C-reactive protein) and pharmaceutical interventions that decrease
inflammation (aspirin and statins).
Arrhythmia
Reperfusion arrhythmias are common in the first 2 hours following thrombolysis. In
addition to ensuring that plasma potassium is above 4.5, intravenous amiodarone and
therapeutic-dose magnesium are indicated for sustained ventricular tachycardia or in
ventricular fibrillation as adjuncts to defibrillation. Amiodarone is usually given via a
central line, but can also be administered via a large antecubital cannula, although the
latter has a slightly higher risk of local necrosis. Arrhythmias occurring more than 48
hours after an acute MI are associated with a worse prognosis and should be
investigated further by coronary angiography to rule out hemodynamically relevant
coronary stenoses, and electrophysiological studies to rule out scar-tissue substrate.
Other therapy
Glycemic control should be optimized in all diabetic patients, preferably with the
use of sliding-scale insulin.
Oral inotropes should be avoided since almost all randomized trials have shown an
increased mortality over placebo.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and b-blockers are given within
the first 24 hours post-MI (in the absence of hypotension or other specific
contraindications). However, although there is clear evidence for the benefit of each
72
--- Страница 84 ---
Coronary artery disease
Intima Internal elastic External elastic Medial Adventitia
lamina lamina layer
Figure 11.The walls of normal blood vessels are composed of distinct layers:
the intima is the innermost layer. It consists of a single layer of endothelial cells lining
the vessel, supported by a layer of connective tissue. The media is composed of smooth
muscle cells and is sandwiched betweenthe internal and external elastic laminae. The
adventitia is the outermost layer and consists mostly of collagen fibers that protect the
blood vessel.
agent individually, there are few data on their effect when used in combination.
Until further data are available, both should be given together.
Short-acting calcium-channel blockers of the dihydropyridine type are
contraindicated in acute MI. The longer-acting dihydropyridines may reduce
reinfarction in patients with a first non-Q-wave infarction or inferior infarction in
the absence of LV dysfunction and pulmonary edema. However, their benefit over
aspirin and b-blockade in the context of MI is unclear.
Although warfarin provides no general benefit, in those patients with mural LV
thrombus following a large acute anterior MI, it can reduce the overall rate of
cerebrovascular complications (2%–3%) by more than half. Thus, it is
recommended for up to 6 months following infarction, or longer if the thrombus
is still nonlaminar on echo.
73
--- Страница 85 ---
Chapter 5
Refer with confidence
Practices vary enormously from center to center, but it is still common for hospital
generalists to manage non-ST elevation, low-risk ACS, and even MI where no
facilities for intervention are available. In these situations, the most common
scenarios for referral to cardiology would be:
• recurrent pain following proven MI
• unstable pain that refuses to settle
• recurrent episodes of atypical pain with no ECG change or enzyme rise
Cardiac rehabilitation
Although the general phenomenon of MI has been recognized for about 100 years,
for the first 70 years our approach to its treatment was diametrically opposite to
that which we now propose. Complete immobilization for anything from 4 to
8 weeks – even to the point where patients were fed, washed, and shaved – was
thought to help the heart to form a firm scar. Exercise was thought to increase the risk
of ventricular aneurysm, cardiac rupture, congestive heart failure, and sudden death.
How bold then were the early pioneers, such as Terry Kavanagh at the Toronto
Rehab center, who in 1973 entered seven post-MI patients for the Boston
Marathon (all seven finished). Not long after that, as the medical profession gained
confidence in this new-found approach, the Journal of Cardiac Rehabilitation was
founded by Mike Pollock and Victor Froelicher, and other pioneers were soon
taking the field forward. Today, controlled trials have demonstrated that cardiac
rehabilitation is not only safe and saves lives (25% reduction in mortality at
3 years), but is more cost-effective than other post-MI treatment interventions,
such as thrombolytic therapy, coronary bypass surgery, and cholesterol-lowering
drugs (though less cost-effective than smoking cessation programs).
Effective cardiac rehabilitation is multilayered and involves permanent lifestyle
changes – such as the incorporation of regular physical activity into everyday life –
to improve the risk profile. The many components of rehabilitation are outlined in
Table 8. Programs are usually run by specialist nurses and physiologists, together
with a cardiologist. However, in the absence of a local formal program, most of the
components can be managed in the community. The potential benefits are
enormous. The dramatic effect of cardiac rehabilitation is thought to be due to
improvements in lipid profile, endothelial function, body composition, autonomic
tone, fibrinolysis, and psychological well-being.
74
--- Страница 86 ---
Coronary artery disease
Elements of a cardiac rehabilitation program
Initial evaluation
•medical history and examination
•ECG
•risk assessment
•goal setting
Low-fat diet: a diet high in fiber (>20 g/day), and low in fat (<10% of total amount
of calories) and cholesterol (<300 mg/day)
Management of lipid levels
Management of hypertension
Cessation of smoking
Weight reduction: body mass index <25 kg/m2
Management of diabetes
Psychosocial management
•identify depression, anxiety, social isolation, anger, and hostility
•stress reduction
Activity counseling and exercise training
•specific individualized aerobic and resistance training schedule, ie, 30 min/day
on at least 3 days a week
Table 8.Elements of a cardiac rehabilitation program.
Further reading
Ashley EA, Myers J, Froelicher V. Exercise testing in clinical medicine. Lancet
2000;356:1592–7.
Balady GJ, Ades PA, Comoss P et al. Core components of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary
prevention programs: A statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association and the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Writing Group. Circulation2000;102:1069–73.
Braunwald E, Antman E, Beasley J et al. ACC/AHA Guidelines for the management of
patients with unstable angina and non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction:
executive summary and recommendations. Circulation2001;102:1193–209.
Gibbons R, Chatterjee K, Daley J et al. ACC/AHA/ACP-ASIM Guidelines for the management
of patients with chronic stable angina: executive summary and recommendations.
Circulation1999;99:2829–48.
Grundy S, Balady GH, Criqui et al. Primary Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease: Guidance
from Framingham. Circulation1998;97:1876–87.
75
--- Страница 87 ---
Chapter 5
Grundy SM, Pasternak R, Greenland P. Assessment of cardiovascular risk by use of multiple
risk factor assessment equations. Circulation1999;100:1481–92.
Klaidman S. Saving the Heart. New York, Oxford University Press, 2000.
Myocardial infarction redefined – A consensus document of the Joint European Society of
Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Committee for the Redefinition of myocardial
infarction. Eur Heart J2000;21:1502–13.
Niebauer J, Dulak J, Chan JR et al. Gene transfer of nitric oxide synthase: effects on
endothelial biology. J Am Coll Cardiol1999;34:1201–7
Niebauer J, Hambrecht R, Velich T et al. Attenuated progression of coronary artery disease
after 6 years of multifactorial risk intervention:role of physical exercise. Circulation
1997;96:2534–41.
Ryan TJ, Antman EM, Brooks NH et al. 1999 update: ACC/AHA guidelines for the
management of patients with acute myocardial infarction. A report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on
Management of Acute Myocardial Infarction). J Am Coll Cardiol1999;34:890–911.
Schuler G, Hambrecht R, Schlierf G et al. Regular physical exercise and low fat diet: effects
on progression of coronary artery disease. Circulation1992;86:1–11.
Wood D, De Backer G, Faergeman O et al. Prevention of coronary heart disease in clinical
practice. Recommendations of the Second Joint Task Force of European and other Societies
on coronary prevention. Eur Heart J1998;19:1434–503.
Wood D, Durrington P, Poulter N et al. Joint British recommendations on prevention of
coronary heart disease in clinical practice. Heart1998;80(Suppl. 2):1–29.
76
--- Страница 88 ---
Chapter 6
Hypertension
Background
Approximately one in four adults in the western world suffers from hypertension.
Of these, 32% are not aware that they have it, 15% are not on any therapy, and
26% are on inadequate therapy. Only 27% are receiving adequate therapy.
Hypertension is a difficult condition to manage because patients are generally
asymptomatic and treatment is preventative rather than palliative. Convincing
patients of the need for poorly tolerated medication in the face of well-being is one
of the challenges confronting clinicians involved in improving the cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality caused by high blood pressure (BP). If untreated,
hypertension has serious consequences, including renal disease, myocardial
infarction (MI), and cerebrovascular accident. However, many patients do not
receive sufficiently aggressive management.
Definition
There is no natural cut-off between normal and high BP. As a result, many
threshold values for treatment have been proposed. Table 1provides a synthesis of
guidelines from the major bodies. Accurate BP measurements are complicated by
several factors. For example, there is an approximately 12/7 mm Hg difference
between BP measurements taken in the clinic and those taken at home – and in
many patients it can be significantly more. Similarly, measurements in the
clinic cannot control for a large element of random biological variation, diurnal
Clinic measurement Home measurement
(mm Hg) (mm Hg)
Optimal control <140/85 <130/80
Mild hypertension 140–150/90–100 135–145/85–95
Moderate hypertension 150–170/100–110 145–165/95–105
Severe hypertension >170/110 >165/105
Table 1.Guidelines for threshold values between normal and high blood pressure.
77
--- Страница 89 ---
Chapter 6
variation, and variation due to chance stress (eg, stress due to being in a traffic jam
on the way to the clinic). Consequently, it is recommended that at least three
readings are taken.
The annual risk of death from cardiovascular disease (including stroke) or coronary
artery disease can be calculated from the European Society of Cardiology tables
or Framingham risk tables. Some bodies recommend that mild hypertensives
should only be treated if their cardiovascular risk exceeds 2% per year. This
consideration of individual risk is welcome, since until recently most clinical trials
have involved head-to-head comparisons of monotherapy, whereas in practice
most patients require combination therapy.
Causes
No cause is identified in 95% of hypertension patients. However, awareness of
treatable causes is important, especially in younger patients in whom there is a
higher probability of the hypertension being secondary to some other cause.
Causes of secondary hypertension are outlined in Table 2.
Assessment
History
History-taking is straightforward since, in most cases, hypertension is
asymptomatic. However, symptoms can include headaches, transient ischemic
attacks, mild visual disturbances, epistaxes, exertional dyspnea (if heart failure has
developed), angina, claudication, weight gain (in Cushing’s syndrome), nocturia,
and hematuria (with renal disease).
A full drug history is important and must include pharmacologically active
preparations such as the combined contraceptive pill and herbal remedies, which
are often not regarded by patients as drugs. Other important medications
are steroids, sympathomimetics (eg, in cold cures), and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, which can reduce the antihypertensive effect of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and b-blockers.
As with any cardiovascular disease, risk factors should be especially well
documented. As full a family tree as possible should be drawn to document
hypertension, diabetes, or early cardiac death. A history of smoking and physical
activity should also be taken. More specific to hypertension, caffeine and alcohol
intake should be recorded and some insight into diet and lifestyle stress should
be acquired.
78
--- Страница 90 ---
Hypertension
Causes of secondary hypertension
Renal
• Renal artery stenosis
• Polycystic kidney disease
• Chronic reflux nephropathy
• Chronic glomerulonephritis
• Polyarteritis nodosa
• Systemic sclerosis
Endocrine
• Cushing’s syndrome
• Conn’s syndrome
• Pheochromocytoma
• Acromegaly
• Hyperparathyroidism
• Polycystic ovarian syndrome
• Metabolic syndrome (diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, obesity)
Other
• Obstructive sleep apnea
• Aortic coarctation
• Pre-eclampsia
• Drugs (combined oral contraceptive pill, cyclosporin, steroids)
• CNS disturbances (raised intracranial pressure, familial dysautonomia)
Table 2.Causes of secondary hypertension. CNS: central nervous system.
Examination
The physical examination has three specific objectives:
• documenting an accurate BP
• excluding possible secondary causes
• quantifying end-organ damage
The BP should be measured in both arms, with the arm and manometer at the
patient’s heart level. Readings should be taken manually in a standardized way
(most clinical trials use Korotkoff I and V – from the first sound heard to the
complete disappearance of sounds). The use of a large-diameter cuff is essential in
those with large arms.
79
--- Страница 91 ---
Chapter 6
The general appearance of the patient may suggest Cushing’s syndrome, a
thyroid disorder, polycystic ovarian disease, sleep apnea, or acromegaly. All
peripheral pulses should be taken to screen for vascular disease, but special
attention should be paid, especially in young people, to radiofemoral delay
(diminished and late pulses in the femoral arteries), which suggests aortic
coarctation. If positive, the BP should be measured in all four limbs. Auscultation
should also be carried out over the aorta and renal arteries for bruits suggestive
of stenosis. Abdominal examination may reveal palpable kidneys in polycystic
disease or a pheochromocytoma.
End-organ damage can be detected by palpation of the apex beat, detection of
bibasal crackles, and examination of the fundi. Diagnosis of hypertensive
retinopathy is based on a four-stage grading system, as outlined in Table 3.
Investigations
Investigations are aimed at diagnosing rare secondary causes and quantifying
end-organ damage.
Only electrolytes, creatinine, fasting glucose, and lipids should be requested in
every patient. A low potassium and raised sodium level suggests
hyperaldosteronism – either primary (Conn’s syndrome) or secondary to
renal artery stenosis. This should prompt measurement of renin and aldosterone
levels. It should be noted that the potassium level is normal in 50% of cases of
primary hyperaldosteronism.
Raised calcium levels suggest possible hyperparathyroidism. If the symptoms
suggest a thyroid problem, thyroid function should be tested. A low threshold
should be adopted for the following:
• renal ultrasound
• urine microscopy (for casts and cells – glomerulonephritis)
• urine samples for testing:
– catecholamine metabolites (three samples, one every 24 hours,
required in acid bottles)
– urinary free cortisol (one sample in a plain bottle – this can also
be used for glomerular filtration rate and 24-hour protein tests)
Once hypertension has caused end-organ damage, the risks associated with any
given level of BP are higher. Evidence of end-organ damage should therefore be
sought in all patients. Dip-stick urinalysis, tests for urea and electrolytes, and a
renal ultrasound can reveal renal insufficiency. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
can be readily detected by electrocardiography or echocardiography (a chest x-ray
80
--- Страница 92 ---
Hypertension
Stage Signs
I Arteriolar narrowing and tortuosity
Increased light reflex
“Silver wiring”
II Arteriovenous nipping
III Cotton-wool “exudates”
Flame and blot hemorrhages
IV Papilledema
Table 3.Stages of hypertensive retinopathy (Keith–Wagener classification).
is rarely necessary). Hypertension with LVH carries a particularly poor prognosis
(the 5-year mortality is around 30%–40%) and is a powerful predictor of
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.
A useful tool, both for generalists and specialists, is the 24-hour ambulatory BP
recording. It is particularly useful when clinic measurements show variability, with
resistant hypertension, or most commonly to diagnose “white coat” hypertension.
An ambulatory BP measurement (ABPM) is not required for those who are at high
risk already, either because of target organ damage or cardiovascular
complications. Such patients can be treated on the basis of clinic measurements.
Equally, an evidence-based approach suggests that those with mild hypertension,
no target organ damage, and low estimated risk may be left untreated (but
followed) without ABPM.
Management
Many randomized controlled trials have shown that BP reduction prevents the
complications of hypertension. Early trials showed a significant improvement in
the risk of stroke, but little or no reduction in coronary heart disease (CHD) events.
Later trials, particularly those in the elderly, have also shown a reduction in CHD
events, although the benefit is not as great as observational studies predicted.
A summary of hypertensive treatments is shown in Table 4.
Lifestyle change
Lifestyle changes are important in the management of patients with hypertension
and can be used alone during an initial period for those with mild hypertension
and low risk.
81
--- Страница 93 ---
Chapter 6
Measure Relative Organ Prognosis/
risk↓↓ protection improvement
Lifestyle change + +/– +
Diuretic + + +
Beta-blocker + + +
ACE inhibitor + + +
Ca2+antagonist + + +/–
Angiotensin receptor + + –
blocker
Alpha-blocker + +/– –
Table 4.Summary of hypertensive treatment. ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme.
+/–: effect is unclear.
Increasing fruit and vegetable intake can improve BP via an effect on potassium; in
combination with a low-fat diet, this can reduce BP by up to 11/6 mm Hg.
In addition, weight loss is associated with an approximately 2.5/1.5 mm Hg drop
for each kilogram lost. Specific advice on abstaining from adding salt to food –
during cooking and at the table – should be given to reduce salt intake to
1 teaspoon per day. Foods such as bread, stock cubes, and breakfast cereals are
often surprisingly high in salt. Reducing salt intake can cut BP by approximately
5/3mmHg. Alcohol, particularly when taken in a binge pattern, is associated with
increased risk. The current American Heart Association guidelines state: “If an
individual chooses to consume alcohol, the limit should be one drink [ie, half a
pint of beer, one glass of wine, or one short drink] a day for women and two drinks
a day for men. People who do not normally drink alcohol should not begin
drinking.” Regular exercise (walking rather than weight training), stopping
smoking, and limiting caffeine intake can all assist in lowering BP and may
independently reduce cardiac risk.
Pharmacotherapy
In most patients, altering lifestyle factors is not enough. For these people, there is
the difficult balance of pharmacotherapy. Fewer than half of all hypertensive
patients can be controlled on monotherapy, whilst one third require three or more
drugs. Knowledge of the mechanisms of action of antihypertensives is important as
it allows rational combinations to be chosen based on complementary mechanisms
of action.
There are four major groups of drug treatments for hypertension and several less
frequently used classes. The sites of action of these antihypertensive agents are
shown in Figure 1.
82
--- Страница 94 ---
Hypertension
Figure 1. Major physiological mechanisms of antihypertensives. See Figure 2for details
of centrally acting hypertensives. ACE: angiotensin-converting enzyme; AT: angiotensin.
Beta-blockers
Beta-adrenoreceptor blockers have been used for many decades in the treatment of
hypertension and are one of the few classes of agents that have been proven to
reduce mortality. They work by reducing cardiac output via negative inotropic and
chronotropic actions. In addition, they block sympathetic nervous system
stimulation of renin release by juxtaglomerular cells. As with all medications, their
83
--- Страница 95 ---
Chapter 6
use is limited primarily by adverse effects. Asthma is generally considered to be
an absolute contraindication, even with agents selective for the cardiovascular
system (b -receptors). Peripheral vascular disease and bradycardia are relative
1
contraindications. In susceptible patients, heart block and heart failure may
be initiated.
The most commonly reported adverse effect is lethargy, and nightmares can occur
with lipid-soluble b-blockers. As with all antihypertensives, erectile dysfunction (ED)
is a problem. The best guide as to whether ED is iatrogenic is to determine whether
the symptoms appeared suddenly. Nevertheless, b-blockers have significant
advantages in patients with coexistent angina and anxiety, and also after MI.
Diuretics
Thiazide diuretics, such as bendrofluazide, are another class of agent for which
randomized controlled trial evidence indicates an improvement in survival, and
should be the first-line drug in the elderly and in those with systolic hypertension.
They work by inhibiting NaCl reabsorption in the distal tubule. This initially leads
to an increase in Na+loss and a reduction in plasma volume. However, the plasma
volume soon recovers, leaving a reduced total peripheral resistance, for which the
mechanism is unknown. Thiazide diuretics are widely used and very cheap, with a
moderate side-effect profile (most commonly hypokalemia, dyslipidemia, and
gout). Potassium levels should be checked regularly.
Loop diuretics have a role to play in the place of thiazides when renal function is
compromised (creatinine >180 mmol/L or 2mg/dL) and on a short-term basis, in
addition to thiazides, in resistant hypertension, where a significant proportion of
patients suffer plasma volume overload.
Calcium-channel blockers
A large number of calcium-channel blockers have been developed and there is
good evidence of their ability to reduce BP. There are three subclasses: the
dihydropyridines (nifedipine-like), the phenylalkylamine derivatives (verapamil),
and the benzothiazepines (diltiazem). All work by blocking the entry of calcium
into the smooth muscle cells of resistance vessels, thereby causing vasodilatation.
Dihydropyridines cause vasodilatation without the bradycardic and negatively
inotropic effects of diltiazem and verapamil (which limits the use of the latter
agents to patients with normal left ventricular function) – so a simpler classification
is “rate-limiting” and “non-rate-limiting”. Short-acting dihydropyridines have
become unpopular following reports of increased risk of MI at high doses.
Longer-acting calcium-channel blockers are useful antihypertensives, especially as
they are lipid-neutral. Side effects include ankle edema, headache, and flushing.
84
--- Страница 96 ---
Hypertension
Renin/angiotensin system antagonists
Angiotensin is a potent vasoconstrictor, but also increases activity of the
sympathetic nervous system by both central and peripheral mechanisms.
Fortunately, the renin–angiotensin system provides a series of targets for
pharmacological attack by ACEIs, angiotensin type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs), and
aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone). ACEIs and ARBs tend to be well
tolerated and have few contraindications, the most important of which is renal
artery stenosis. It is important to monitor renal function and potassium levels
during initiation and maintenance of these agents. ACEIs are contraindicated in
women of child-bearing potential and may cause a troublesome cough through
their inhibition of the enzyme responsible for bradykinin degradation. First-dose
hypotension can be a problem in elderly patients on diuretics, although newer,
longer-acting formulations have reduced this concern. ACEIs are lipid-neutral,
improve insulin resistance, and may be able to induce regression of LVH.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists
Alpha -antagonists (such as doxazosin and prazosin) are becoming more widely
1
used in the treatment of hypertension. They have a good side-effect profile
(palpitations and occasional postural hypotension). In addition, they are reported
to have beneficial effects on lipid profile and insulin resistance, and lack the
negative effects on sexual potency of other antihypertensives, which is a particular
advantage for diabetics. They work to reduce total peripheral resistance by blocking
the sympathetic activation of a -receptors on resistance vessels.
1
Centrally acting sympathomimetics
Clonidine and a-methyldopa, centrally acting a -adrenoceptor agonists, were once
2
popular choices, but are now less widely initiated outside specialist scenarios such
as pre-eclampsia. They carry a risk of rebound hypertension on withdrawal.
Other vasodilators
Other vasodilators, such as hydralazine and the very potent minoxidil, are mostly
used in resistant hypertension when standard agents fail. Use of the latter is
generally restricted by unpleasant side effects such as hypertrichosis.
Imidazoline type 1 receptor agonists
The identification of imidazoline receptors has revealed that the effects of older agents
on the central nervous system reflect a relatively nonspecific central site of action
mediated primarily through a-adrenoceptor agonism (see Figure 2). It seems that
2
some of the adverse effects of these agents, which are also mediated through this
pathway, can be avoided by the use of selective imidazoline type 1 receptoragents.
Early results suggest these agents are well tolerated, with a dry mouth being the only
frequently reported unwanted effect (13% at 3 weeks, 2% at 12 months).
85
--- Страница 97 ---
Chapter 6
Methyldopa Clonidine Moxonidine
Imidazoline
α 2 receptors type 1 receptor
agents
Dry mouth Sedation Inhibition of sympathetic
vasoconstrictors
Figure 2.Centrally acting antihypertensives.
Pharmacotherapy selection
In the absence of compelling reasons to choose other medications, the first-line
choice should remain a b-blocker or thiazide diuretic. These are the drugs for
which clear evidence of mortality reduction exists. In addition, they are generally
well tolerated. There are good reasons to consider b-blockers first in younger
people and thiazides first in older people. However, the majority of patients will
require more than one drug, and the choice should be rational. Here, synergistic
action is important (see Figure 2). Good combinations are:
• thiazides (which cause secondary hyperreninemia) and ACEIs
or ARBs (which block it)
• b-blockers (which act to reduce renin release and cardiac output)
and calcium-channel blockers (which cause vasodilatation – do not
combine b-blockers with verapamil or diltiazem)
Following this, it is generally worth trying one of the other classes mentioned
above. Treatment will be highly individualized depending on patient tolerance and
efficacy, but some guidelines are outlined in Table 5. It is worth taking readings
after each change of drug so that agents with no effect can be stopped.
Systolic versus diastolic hypertension
The question as to the relative importance of systolic and diastolic BP is common in the
management of hypertension. For many years it was felt that as systolic hypertension
was more common in the elderly it was an inevitable part of aging and arteriolar
86
--- Страница 98 ---
Hypertension
Diuretics b-blockers ACE
inhibitors
Examples Bendrofluazide, Atenolol, Lisinopril,
hydrochlorothiazide bisoprolol ramipril
Particularly Elderly patients The young, Diabetics
good in: anxious patients
Contraindicated in: Gout Asthma, Pregnancy,
heart block renovascular
disease
Angiotensin Calcium- a-blockers
type 1 receptor channel
antagonists blockers
Examples Losartan, Amlodipine, Doxazosin,
valsartan felodipine prazosin
Particularly ACE cough Isolated Lipid
good in: systolic HT abnormalities
Contraindicated in: Pregnancy, – Urinary
renovascular incontinence
disease
Table 5.Guidelines for hypertension pharmacotherapy. ACE: angiotensin-converting
enzyme; HT: hypertension.
stiffening. As a result, the focus was primarily on diastolic BP. In fact, both systolic and
diastolic BP predict mortality equally well. However, in the elderly population with
predominantly systolic BP, recent evidence suggests it is not the absolute values of
systolic or diastolic hypertension, but the difference between the two that predicts
mortality best, ie, the pulse pressure. This means that a patient with a BP of
160/80mmHg may be at higher risk than a patient with a BP of 160/90mmHg. This
finding, which actually fits well with current thinking on reflected pressure waves in the
stiffer arteries of older people, has little therapeutic relevance as yet because we do not
have agents that preferentially improve pulse pressure. Thiazides and calcium-channel
blockers reduce systolic hypertension more than diastolic, so these are the rational
choices. However, the key for the future may be drugs that can restore vascular elasticity,
and in this respect nitrates – which donate nitric oxide – are the most promising.
Special populations
Elderly patients
It is a myth that hypertension is “normal” in the elderly and they have less to lose
because of a shorter life expectancy. In fact, the absolute benefit from treatment of
the elderly is much greater than that for younger hypertensives because of their
87
--- Страница 99 ---
Chapter 6
larger absolute risk. However, it is true that the prevalence of hypertension is higher
amongst the elderly. Optimum BP levels are the same for older people as they are
for younger people, and evidence for treatment benefit extends until at least
80 years. Taking pulse pressure into account (see “Systolic versus diastolic
hypertension”, above), the best agents are thiazide diuretics and long-acting
dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers.
Ethnic groups
Afro-Caribbean blacks have a particularly high prevalence of hypertension and
severe complications. Their presentation is unusual in that the renin–angiotensin
system is often suppressed. As a result, b-blockers and ACEIs are unlikely to be
successful as monotherapy in these patients. Diuretics, calcium-channel blockers,
and salt restriction are all effective.
Diabetics
Hypertension is common in diabetics and plays a major role in the vascular
complications of the disease. Recent studies have suggested there is more to gain
from controlling hypertension in diabetics than there is in achieving
normoglycemia. For this reason, particularly aggressive BP-lowering treatment is
warranted in these patients. ACEIs, preferably combined with a thiazide diuretic,
are the treatment of choice. Previous avoidance of b-blockers or thiazide diuretics
because of possible worsening of glycemic control needs to be reassessed in light
of this information. Most recent studies show that both groups of drugs can be
safely administered in diabetics.
Pregnancy
Hypertension occurs in up to 10% of pregnancies. The key distinction is between
chronic hypertension in a pregnant woman and pregnancy-induced hypertension
(pre-eclampsia) – defined as a rise in BP of >30/15 mm Hg from early pregnancy.
Little is known about which agents are truly safe in pregnancy, but methyldopa is
generally considered first line, with calcium antagonists or hydralazine regarded
secondarily. Labetalol is sometimes used in the third trimester. In addition, trials in
pregnant women with pre-eclampsia have suggested that magnesium sulfate
injections may reduce the risk of eclampsia developing by as much as half. ACEIs
should be avoided.
Erectile dysfunction
EDis a common problem in hypertensives. It is common because it can be caused
by both hypertension (via vascular disease) and its treatment. Differentiating the
two from psychogenic causes is a challenge. However, it is made easier by taking a
full history: ask about desire, morning erections, erections during masturbation,
the exact timing of onset, life stress, sexual history, alcohol, and nonprescription
88
--- Страница 100 ---
Hypertension
medication. Palpation of the penis for Peyronie’s disease and the testes for atrophy
should be added to the routine examination. If ED clearly relates to one particular
medication, it is worth trying alternatives. If ED remains resistant, then possible
treatments are vacuum devices, intraurethral alprostadil, and sildenafil. Patients
with more than three risk factors for coronary disease should have an exercise test
before starting sildenafil.
Generalist management
Hypertension is one of the few cardiovascular conditions where, in theory, the
generalist can manage the whole process. Because of the overwhelming likelihood
that any given hypertensive patient will have “essential” hypertension, only a small
number of routine investigations are warranted. These are:
• urine dipstick
• blood glucose, electrolyte, and creatinine levels
• total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein ratio
• electrocardiography
However, in a young patient, a patient with severe hypertension without a family
history, or with signs or symptoms suggesting a secondary cause, the full
investigative program detailed above (see “Investigations”) should be instituted.
This is normally done predominantly within a specialist center.
Refer with confidence
In practice, hypertension specialists tend to see patients from one of the following
four categories:
• patients with resistant hypertension
• patients from special groups with hypertension,
eg, pregnant women or young people
• patients with known secondary hypertension
• patients with possible accelerated hypertension (see below)
Most generalists would expect to try at least three agents and carry out basic
investigations before referring the patient to a specialist for the management
of resistant hypertension. Certainly, it would be unusual to make use of
vasodilators in the community. However, in the special groups mentioned above, it
would not be uncommon for the full work-up to be done from the beginning in a
special center. Clearly, any suspicion of accelerated hypertension should result in
immediate referral.
89
--- Страница 101 ---
Chapter 6
Basic science
BP is a normally distributed, polygenic trait. That is, an individual’s BP results from the
effects of many genes interacting with each other and the environment. Due in part to
this, genetics has so far struggled to explain essential hypertension. However, early
studies have suggested that up to 50% of variation within the general population could
be explained by genetic factors. The experimental approach has involved studying
affected sibling pairs and scanning the whole genome for chromosomal regions with
higher levels of genetic marker similarity.
Selectively bred animal models have also been used to study hypertension. Despite
much effort, the only mutations that have been convincingly shown to be associated
with hypertension are those of the ACEgene, and these gene polymorphisms are more
strongly associated with atherosclerotic disease than hypertension.
The role of the sympathetic nervous system in hypertension has been debated over
many years. Most agree that, together with inadequate salt excretion, it plays an
important initiating role (validating the choice of β-blockers as a first-line agent in
young hypertensives). However, there is significant controversy as to its continuing
role. The prevalent view is that the sympathetic nervous system plays only a minor part
in chronic hypertension, and recent studies showing the benefit of ARBs over
β-blockers reinforce this.
Resistant hypertension
Failure to reduce BP to <140/90 mm Hg with three or more drugs qualifies the
patient as “resistant”. Resistant hypertensives commonly suffer plasma volume
expansion, despite the absence of clinical signs. In this situation, a more aggressive
diuretic therapy can achieve targets where other combinations have failed to do so.
Secondary causes are common in resistant hypertensives – they should be referred
to a specialist to ensure a full diagnostic work-up. Apparent therapeutic failure
could be due to noncompliance; many patients who have been prescribed several
different tablets for an asymptomatic condition respond by not taking all of the
tablets as directed. Therefore, before altering the medication, determine whether
the patient is actually taking it.
Malignant (or accelerated phase) hypertension
In about 1% of patients with hypertension, the condition follows an accelerated
course. BP is markedly raised (diastolic >130 mm Hg) and is associated with
grade III–IV retinopathy. There may be encephalopathy (headache, confusion,
visual disturbance, seizures, and coma), cardiac failure, and rapidly deteriorating
renal function. The vascular lesion associated with malignant hypertension is
fibrinoid necrosis of the walls of small arteries and arterioles. The prognosis is very
90
--- Страница 102 ---
Hypertension
poor: untreated, 90% of patients die within 1 year, and even with treatment the
5-year survival rate is only 60%.
Malignant hypertension is a medical emergency that requires immediate therapy.
However, the fall in BP should be controlled and carefully monitored as cerebral
and myocardial perfusion can become compromised, which could lead to
infarction (an initial target diastolic BP should be around 100–110 mm Hg). The
reduction in BP is achieved with parenteral agents, such as nitroprusside or
labetalol, ideally with intra-arterial BP monitoring. If a pheochromocytoma is
suspected, drugs such as phenoxybenzamine or phentolamine (a-adrenergic
blockers) should be used first. Once the acute episode has been successfully
treated, the BP can be further titrated down over the following weeks.
Further reading
Graves, JW. Management of difficult-to-control hypertension. Mayo Clin Proc 2000;75:
278–84.
Hurley ML. New hypertension guidelines. Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. RN1998;61:25–8.
Kjeldsen SE, Erdine S, Farsang C et al. 1999 WHO/ISH hypertension guidelines – highlights
and ESH update. J Hypertens2002;20:153–5.
O’Brien E, Staessen JA. Critical appraisal of the JNC VI, WHO/ISH and BHS guidelines for
essential hypertension. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2000;1:675–82.
Ramsay L, Williams B, Johnston G et al. Guidelines for management of hypertension: report
of the third working party of the British Hypertension Society. J Hum Hypertens
1999;13:569–92.
The American Heart Association guidelines are available at http://www.americanheart.org.
European guidelines are available at http://www.escardio.org.
91
--- Страница 103 ---
92
--- Страница 104 ---
Chapter 7
Heart failure
Background
The survival rate for myocardial infarction (MI) has greatly increased in recent years
due to the success of thrombolysis and primary angioplasty. However, the ensuing
epidemic of heart failure has created a major public health problem. Data from the UK
suggest that heart failure affects approximately 2% of the population. Furthermore, the
prognosis for chronic heart failure (CHF) is poor: a patient admitted to hospital with
pulmonary edema has a poorer prognosis (the 5-year mortality rate is around 50%)
than a patient presenting with a carcinoma in any organ other than the lung.
The many causes of heart failure (see Table 1) operate through the central
mechanism of reduced ventricular function. As a consequence, the heart is unable
to perfuse the tissues adequately. The resulting clinical syndrome (see Table2) can
be explained by compensatory measures, such as cardiac hypertrophy and
activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin–angiotensin system.
Heart failure is categorized as either systolic or diastolic. Systolic dysfunction is due
to poor left ventricular (LV) contraction, usually expressed as ejection fraction (EF).
Heart failure patients with diastolic dysfunction (more common in the elderly)
have normal LV ejection fraction; the defect seems to lie in relaxation of the left
ventricle and is associated with delayed filling. For the generalist, one clue to
diastolic dysfunction lies in the chest x-ray (CXR), which can show signs of
congestion without significant LV dilatation. However, echocardiography is
required for a firm diagnosis (see Chapter 4, Understanding the echocardiogram).
Causes of heart failure
Ischemic heart disease High-output cardiac failure
Aortic or mitral regurgitation (volume stress) Anemia
Aortic or mitral stenosis (pressure stress) Thyrotoxicosis
Congenital cardiomyopathy Septicemia
Constrictive pericarditis Paget’s disease
Alcohol excess Acromegaly
Table 1.Causes of heart failure.
93
--- Страница 105 ---
Chapter 7
System Change
Heart Left ventricular hypertrophy
Left ventricular dilatation
Changes in calcium-cycling proteins
Switch to fetal isoforms of contractile proteins
Atrial natriuretic peptide release
Brain natriuretic peptide release
Release of proinflammatory cytokines (eg, TNF)
Lungs Excessive ventilation
Increased dead space
Kidneys Renin release
Erythropoietin release
Decrease in glomerular filtration rate
Sodium and water retention
Posterior pituitary Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) release
Adrenal glands Aldosterone increase
Catecholamine release
Autonomic nervous system Activation of sympathetic system
Arteries Vasoconstriction
Endothelin release
Skeletal muscles Endothelial dysfunction
Changes to metabolism
Wasting
Release of proinflammatory cytokines (eg, TNF)
Table 2.The multiorgan symptoms of heart failure. TNF: tumor necrosis factor.
Pathophysiology
The approach to heart failure has changed enormously over the past few years (see
Figure 1). Earlier thinking focused on inadequate pump function and the accepted
therapeutic wisdom was to bolster it with b-agonist inotropes. The idea of treating
heart failure by blocking the sympathetic nervous system would have been
regarded as heretical and dangerous. However, it has now been realized that most
CHF pathology is a result of the body’s own compensatory mechanisms (see
Figure2) and that interrupting these neurohumoral pathways achieves more than
attempting to “overdrive” the failing heart. The exception is acute decompensation
(acute heart failure, pulmonary edema, cardiogenic shock), where the focus is on
short-term survival; although the primary aim is still the reduction of preload and
94
--- Страница 106 ---
Heart failure
(a) The old treatment paradigm
Fluid
overload
Pump function Underperfusion
of organs
Frank–Starling
curve
(b) The new treatment paradigm
End diastolic
pressure
ADH
Volume
Renin– overload
a syn sg ti eo mtensin Vasoconstriction Preload
Afterload
Pump function Underperfusion Sympathetic
of organs system Tachycardia
Coronary
perfusion
Treatment: interrupt neurohormonal pathways
Figure 1.Treatment of heart failure according to (a) old and (b) new paradigms.
ADH: antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin).
afterload using diuretics and vasodilators, inotropes in the form of b-agonists are
also used.
Clinical history and examination
The hallmark of heart failure is dyspnea. The classic combination of raised jugular
venous pressure (JVP), peripheral edema, palpable liver, basal crepitations,
tachycardia, and a third heart sound is well known. Orthopnea (shortness of breath
when lying flat) and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (acute nocturnal shortness of
breath) are both manifestations of decompensation of ventricular function –
precipitated by diurnal susceptibility and increased venous return resulting from
adoption of the supine position.
In an elderly person, the cause of acute shortness of breath can often be difficult
to diagnose, and the chest may reveal nothing but coarse breath sounds
throughout. In this situation, two factors are helpful: the JVP and overt
sympathetic overactivation (cold peripheries and profuse sweating).
95
ecroF
--- Страница 107 ---
Chapter 7
Chronic heart failure
Reduced cardiac output
Central and peripheral hypoxia
Inflammatory cytokine Renin–angiotensin– Sympathetic
activation aldosterone activity
Endothelial
dysfunction
Exercise intolerance
Figure 2.Chronic heart failure. TNF: tumor necrosis factor.
Investigations
Electrocardiography
The electrocardiogram of a patient with heart failure often shows LV hypertrophy
(LVH). This may show a “strain” pattern (LVH plus ST depression), most
commonly in the lateral chest leads. Arrhythmias are also common in heart failure.
Chest x-ray
Classic signs on CXRs are common only for acute heart failure. Typically, some of
the following signs are seen (see Figure 3):
• cardiomegaly (see Figure 4)
• upper lobe blood diversion
• “bat’s wing” alveolar edema
• pleural effusions
• Kerley B lines (lymphatics)
96
--- Страница 108 ---
Heart failure
(a)
Prominent
upper
lobe
Alveolar
vessels
edema
(“bat’s wing”)
Kerley
B lines
(interstitial
edema) Pleural
effusion
Cardiomegaly
(b)
Figure 3.(a) Classic signs of acute heart failure that can be seen on a
chest x-ray of left ventricular failure. (b) Pleural effusion on a chest x-ray.
Echocardiography
This is the investigation of choice and can identify and quantify LVH and
dysfunction (both systolic and diastolic) as well as examine causes of heart failure,
such as valve abnormalities.
Blood tests
The measurement of natriuretic peptides for the diagnosis of heart failure is not
yet routine. However, other blood tests can contribute to the clinical picture.
The sodium concentration is often low (<130 mmol/L, despite high total body
sodium) as a result of dilution and is a strong prognostic indicator. The potassium
level is altered by many of the therapeutic agents and should be kept in the mid to
high normal range (4.25–5 mmol/L) to minimize the risk of arrhythmia. If the
pulse is of full volume, investigative blood tests for anemia and thyroid function
should be carried out. If echo suggests restrictive cardiomyopathy, further tests can
be carried out for iron storage disease, amyloidosis, or sarcoidosis.
97
--- Страница 109 ---
Chapter 7
Figure 4.Cardiomegaly and pleural effusion (on the right
side) in a patient with heart failure.
Management: acute heart failure
The approach to the management of acute decompensation is different from that
to CHF. Acute pulmonary edema should be managed by:
• sitting the patient up
• giving high-flow oxygen
• giving diamorphine (2.5–5 mg intravenous [IV])
• giving nitrates (sublingual at first, then isosorbide mononitrate
2–10mg/hour IV)
• giving loop diuretics (eg, furosemide [frusemide] 40–80 mg slow IV)
Blood pressure is a key measurement and should be considered when deciding the
rate of a nitrate infusion or whether to use b-agonists. If the systolic blood pressure
drops below 100 mm Hg, consideration should be given to replacing the nitrate
infusion with one containing dobutamine (2–10mg/kg/min). Although the effect of
an IV diuretic can often be dramatic (probably due to an early effect on pulmonary
venous dilatation), nitrates are preferred because, in addition to decreasing preload,
they also decrease peripheral resistance and do not reduce cardiac output.
It is also important to take the precipitating factor into account. If, for example, a
patient is in atrial fibrillation, slowing the ventricular rate may be more effective than
a combination of more general measures. Similarly, if a patient has suffered an MI
then thrombolysis or intervention may be the key to their recovery.
98
--- Страница 110 ---
Heart failure
(a) (b)
Diastolic
Unassisted augmentation
systole
Assisted
systole
Assisted aortic
and diastolic
pressure
Figure 5.(a) Insertion of an intra-aortic balloon pump and (b) the corresponding arterial
pressure waveform.
Management: cardiogenic shock
Cardiogenic shock, which has a 90% mortality rate, is the most severe form of acute
heart failure. It is diagnosed when acute heart failure and hypotension are resistant to
the measures described above and there is evidence of tissue hypoxia. Treatment, which
should be in the coronary care unit of a specialist center, involves inotropic support,
invasive monitoring equipment, intra-aortic balloon pumping, and, in the setting of MI,
cardiac catheterization.
Intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation
Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) counterpulsation was developed in the early
1960s. A balloon is inserted, via the femoral artery, into the descending aorta (see
Figure 5). Using electrocardiography for synchronization, the balloon is almost
instantaneously, automatically inflated with helium at the onset of diastole, then
deflated just prior to systole. This serves a dual purpose:
• it improves coronary blood flow by increasing the perfusion pressure
in the ascending aorta during diastole
• it encourages systemic perfusion by reducing impedance to ventricular
ejection at the point of balloon deflation (it creates a negative pressure
which helps to “suck” the blood out)
Contraindications to IABP include severe aortic regurgitation and aortic dissection.
99
--- Страница 111 ---
Chapter 7
Class Classification
I No limitation of physical activity. No shortness of breath, fatigue, or
heart palpitations with ordinary physical activity.
II Slight limitation of physical activity. Shortness of breath, fatigue, or
heart palpitations with ordinary physical activity, but patients are
comfortable at rest.
III Marked limitation of activity. Shortness of breath, fatigue, or heart
palpitations with less than ordinary physical activity, but patients are
comfortable at rest.
IV Severe to complete limitation of activity. Shortness of breath, fatigue, or
heart palpitations with any physical exertion and symptoms appear
even at rest.
Table 3.The New York Heart Association functional classification of chronic heart failure.
Management: chronic heart failure
The chronic form of heart failure is a condition that most generalists treat every day.
When referring these patients, it is useful to classify the severity of heart failure.
This is facilitated by a very simple scale: the New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional classification (see Table 3). It is straightforward and provides a common
language that is understood by cardiologists worldwide.
Diagnosis and assessment
The initial diagnosis and assessment of the severity and progression of CHF can be
made using echo and exercise testing with gas analysis. The most commonly used
echo measure is the EF. This is rated as:
• 45%–70%, normal
• 35%–45%, mildly impaired
• 25%–35%, moderately impaired
• <25%, severely impaired
• <15%, end-stage/transplant candidates
• 5% is compatible with life, but not long life
The single best exercise-testing measurement is the maximum rate of oxygen
consumption (VO max). In a situation where cardiac and respiratory causes of
2
dyspnea coexist, exercise testing with gas analysis can be particularly useful in
discerning which is the greater problem.
Treatment
The first step in the management of CHF is patient education. It is easy for physicians
to forget (since they use the term every day) that, to most patients, heart “failure”
100
--- Страница 112 ---
Heart failure
HISTORICAL HEARTS
Hippocrates believed that the left side of the heart and its associated arteries
were conduits for air rather than blood. Galen (AD 138–201) thought that
blood passed through invisible pores in the ventricular septum. Such was his
influence on Roman medical thinking that this idea remained in place until the
15th century when an embargo on the dissection of human cadavers was lifted
by the Pope. Not long after this, Leonardo da Vinci and others began to produce
detailed anatomical drawings, and William Harvey finally described the
function of the heart as a pump that pushed blood through a circulatory
system, beat by beat.
sounds significantly worse than “myocardial infarction”, “heart attack”, or even
“cardiac arrest”. Educating patients about their condition – by giving them
information about avoiding excessive salt intake and teaching them how to use their
daily weight to monitor fluid balance – will pay dividends in long-term management.
Spironolactone, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), and b-blockers
are the only agents that have been shown to reduce heart failure mortality, and all
are now widely used in the community. However, their use requires caution.
Although not strictly necessary, most practitioners use short-acting preparations
(eg, captopril, metoprolol) when first starting these treatments.
Diuretics
Although diuretics are the mainstay of CHF management, their main role is in
symptom control – they may even increase neurohumoral activation. An approach
that allows patients to take control of their own diuretic dosage and alter it according
to their daily weight (in much the same way as diabetics alter their insulin dosage)
may be successful in many patients. It is recommended that diuretics should always
be used with an ACEI. In addition, the skillful use of diuretics with complementary
actions (see Figure 6, Tables 4 and 5) can aid diuresis and even avoid hospital
admission if the balance is upset. Given the choice between increasing the dose of a
loop diuretic or adding another agent, it is usually best to add another agent.
Spironolactone has been shown to improve outcomes in stage III–IV heart failure
with an effect equivalent to that of ACE inhibition (25 mg spironolactone has
a beneficial effect on remodeling, but essentially no effect on potassium levels
and diuresis).
Metolazone is a thiazide-like diuretic that has a powerful synergistic action with
loop diuretics, so should be used in the community only as a last resort, for short
periods, and be accompanied by daily electrolyte checks.
101
--- Страница 113 ---
Chapter 7
Spironolactone
Thiazide
diuretics
Na+ CI–
Na+
K+
K+H+
H Ni ag +h NLo aw + Collecting
Low High duct
K+ K+
Distal tubule
K+
CI–
Na+
Loop diuretics
Loop of Henle
inhibition
Figure 6.The mechanism of action of diuretics in chronic heart failure management.
DEFINING HEARTS
Pulmonary edema was first explained by Henry Welch, who showed that it could
be reproduced by obstructing the outflow of the left ventricle. However, the first
definition of heart failure was provided by Theophile Bonet (1620–1689), who
published clinico-pathological studies linking the effects of valvular disease and
cardiac chamber size to the clinical features of dyspnea and edema.
102
--- Страница 114 ---
Heart failure
Class Compound Mechanism of action
Loop Furosemide Inhibit triporter pump in thick ascending
diuretics (frusemide), loop of Henle, thus inhibiting Na+ and
bumetanide, Cl– reabsorption, which leads to diuresis
torasemide and potentially hypokalemia
Thiazide Bendrofluazide, Inhibit NaCl reabsorption in the distal
diuretics hydrochlorothiazide tubule. The greater Na+ load in the
distal tubule stimulates Na+ exchange
with K+ and H+, causing hypokalemia
and metabolic alkalosis
Metolazone Particularly potent diuretic, especially
when combined with a loop diuretic
Potassium-sparing Amiloride Blocks Na+channels in the distal
diuretics nephron
Spironolactone Aldosterone antagonist
Table 4.Diuretics used in the treatment of heart failure.
Treatment of heart failure with diuretics
Initial diuretic treatment:
• Loop diuretics or thiazides. Always combine with ACEI
• If GFR 230 mL/min do not use thiazides, except as therapy prescribed
synergistically with loop diuretics
Insufficient response:
(1) Combine loop diuretics and thiazides
(2) Increase dose of diuretic
(3) With persistent fluid retention – administer loop diuretics twice daily
(4) In severe CHF add metolazone or low-dose spironolactone (25–50mg) with
frequent measurement of creatine and electrolytes
Potassium-sparing diuretics (triamterene, amiloride, spironolactone):
• Use only if hypokalemia persists after initiation of therapy with ACEIs and diuretics
• Start 1-week, low-dose administration
• Potassium supplements are usually ineffective
Table 5.Treatment of heart failure with diuretics (loop diuretics, thiazides, metolazone).
ACEI: angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; CHF: chronic heart failure; GFR: glomerular
filtration rate. Reprinted with permission from the European Society of Cardiology (Task Force
of the Working Group on Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology. The treatment
of heart failure. Eur Heart J 1997;18:736–53).
103
--- Страница 115 ---
Chapter 7
The recommended procedure for starting an ACEI
• Avoid excessive diuresis before treatment. Stop diuretics, if being used, for 24hours
• It may be advisable to start treatment in the evening, when supine, to minimize
the potential negative effect on blood pressure, although there are no data in heart
failure to support this. When initiated in the morning, supervision for several hours
with blood pressure control is advisable
• Start with a low dose and build up to maintenance dosages shown to be effective
in large trials
• Monitor renal function/electrolytes during drug titration every 3–5 days until stable,
and then at 3 months and subsequently at 6-monthly intervals. If renal function
deteriorates substantially, stop treatment
• Avoid potassium-sparing diuretics during initiation of therapy. Add potassium-
sparing diuretics only with persisting hypokalemia or refractory natriuretic therapy.
However, spironolactone can safely be added at a dose of 25 mg, since at this
dose it has no effect on potassium levels and diuresis
• Avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
• Check blood pressure 1–2 weeks after each dose increment
The following patients should be referred for specialist care:
Cause of heart failure unknown
Systolic blood pressure <100 mm Hg
Serum creatinine >1.47 mg/dL (130 mmol/L)
Serum sodium <130 mmol/L
Moderate or severe heart failure
Valve disease
Table 6.The recommended procedure for starting an angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor (ACEI). Reprinted with permission from the European Society of Cardiology
(Task Force of the Working Group on Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology.
The treatment of heart failure. Eur Heart J 1997;18:736–53).
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
ACEIs were the first agents shown to reduce mortality in heart failure. Angiotensin
receptor blockers (ARBs) are currently reserved for those patients with an ACE
cough. Guidelines for starting ACEIs are outlined in Table 6.
Beta-blockers
Much of the early work on b-blockers used carvedilol – a nonselective b-blocker,
a-antagonist, and antioxidant. However, although its significant effect appeared to
result from b-blockade resulting in many different b-blocking agents being used,
recent trials have suggested there may be effects over and above that of b-blockade.
Beneficial effects of b-blockade include a reduction in heart rate (which increases
104
--- Страница 116 ---
Heart failure
Digoxin
Na+ Ca2+
–
Out
In
K+ Na+
Na+ Ca2+
Figure 7.Mechanism of action of digoxin. Digoxin inhibits Na+/K+ATPase. As a
consequence of an increased intercellular Na+concentration, Ca2+extrusion (via Na+/Ca2+
exchange) is reduced. The result is an increase in cellular Ca2+.
myocardial perfusion), regression of LVH (probably related to inhibition of the
deleterious effects of excess catecholamines), and a reduction in sudden death
(probably related to a reduction in ventricular fibrillation – 50% of heart failure
deaths are due to arrhythmia).
Digoxin
Digoxin has perhaps the longest history of any of the treatments for heart failure.
However, being a positive inotrope, it occupies a controversial place overarching the
old and new paradigms for the treatment of sinus rhythm heart failure. It works by
increasing cellular calcium via inhibition of Na+/K+ATPase and consequent reduction
of Ca2+ extrusion via Na+/Ca2+ exchange (see Figure 7). As K+ “competes” with
digoxin at the ATPase site, digoxin can become toxic in hypokalemic patients.
Symptoms of digoxin toxicity are gastrointestinal upset and (more rarely) visual
disturbances and headache. However, despite its widespread use, there have been no
large, prospective, placebo-controlled trials to determine the efficacy of digoxin in
reducing mortality (although it has been shown to reduce hospital admissions).
Hydralazine and nitrates
The vasodilator combination of hydralazine (up to 300 mg) and nitrates (160 mg
isosorbide dinitrate) has been tested with digoxin and diuretics in several large trials
and has been associated with mortality reductions in heart failure. However, the advent
of ARBs is likely to offer a better alternative to ACEIs than this drug combination.
105
--- Страница 117 ---
Chapter 7
NYHA Affect outcome Symptom
class control
only
ACEI BB Spironolactone ARB Hydralazine/ Digoxin Diuretic
nitrates
I + +/– – – + – +
II + + – + + – +
III + + + + + + +
IV + + + + + + +
Table 7.Treatment of heart failure according to the New York Heart Association (NYHA)
functional classification of congestive heart failure. ACEI: angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor; ARB: angiotensin receptor blocker; BB: b-blocker.
Future directions
Areas of controversy still exist in the management of CHF. For example, aspirin is
known to be effective as an aid to secondary prevention of coronary artery disease.
However, it can reduce the efficacy of ACEIs. Also, despite the high rate of heart
failure deaths due to arrhythmia (50%), amiodarone is the only antiarrhythmic
(so far) that has been shown to reduce mortality.
New agents currently being investigated in trials include:
• calcium sensitizers (increase contractile response to intracellular Ca2+)
• endothelin antagonists (there are increased levels of endothelin –
a potent vasoconstrictor – in heart failure); results of all recent trials
have been negative or neutral at best
• TNF-aantibodies; recent trials all produced negative results
• neutral endopeptidase inhibitors (neutral endopeptidase breaks down
atrial natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide – peptides with
diuretic, natriuretic, and vasodilator properties)
Heart failure treatments, according to NYHA classification, are outlined in Table 7.
Nonpharmacotherapies
Recent evidence suggests that individualized exercise training programs can be
beneficial in stable, mild to moderate heart failure. Like most other aspects of the
treatment of heart failure, today’s advice (exercise) is the opposite of that from
30years ago (bed rest).
106
--- Страница 118 ---
Heart failure
EARLY TREATMENTS
The first breakthrough in the treatment of heart failure was by William
Withering (1741–1799), who published observations of the therapeutic use of
digitalis (foxglove). Ironically, he believed its main mechanism of action was
diuretic. Until the discovery of digitalis, treatment for heart failure had
remained unchanged since Egyptian times: bed rest, fluid restriction, and weak
herbal diuretics were combined with starvation, laxatives, and venesection.
Patients can perhaps derive some solace from the fact they are living today,
rather than 200 years ago.
Revascularization of patients with heart failure is being considered increasingly as
it is realized that chronic LV dysfunction does not necessarily mean permanent or
irreversible cell damage. Myocardium that has suffered low-level ischemia and no
longer contributes significantly to ventricular function (hibernating myocardium)
remains viable, and therefore potentially rescuable. It can be detected by
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging, perfusion imaging, low-dose
dobutamine stress echo, or PET scanning (perfusion metabolism mismatch).
Many patients with systolic heart failure exhibit significant intra- or interventricular
conduction delays (IVCDs) that cause ventricular dysynchrony, recognized by a
wide QRS complex on the ECG (typically, a left bundle branch block morphology).
Ventricular dysynchrony has several important consequences for cardiac
performance, which include abnormal interventricular septal wall motion, reduced
diastolic filling time, and prolonged mitral regurgitation duration. In addition,
there is a proportional increase in mortality with increasing QRS duration. Cardiac
resynchronization therapy (CRT) provides atrial-synchronized, biventricular pacing
using standard pacing technology combined with a special third lead. This third
lead is implanted via the coronary sinus and positioned in a cardiac vein to sense
and pace the left ventricle. Following a sensed atrial contraction, both ventricles are
stimulated to contract simultaneously. The resulting resynchronization of
ventricular contraction reduces mitral regurgitation and optimizes left ventricular
filling, thereby improving cardiac function.
Transplantation and ventricular assist devices are options for end-stage disease.
Local availability and guidelines vary. Indications are:
• severe LV dysfunction (eg, EF <20% as demonstrated by
radionuclide ventriculography)
• VO max <14 mL/kg/min (patients with values above this tend
2
to have a better prognosis without surgery)
107
--- Страница 119 ---
Chapter 7
Contraindications center on comorbidities, eg, vasculopathy, diabetes mellitus
with target-organ damage, or pulmonary hypertension. In addition, few centers will
transplant patients over the age of 60 years.
Several studies have shown clear benefit from a multidisciplinary approach to heart
failure treatment. Specialist nurses who visit patients in the community can
significantly reduce the rate of hospitalization by helping with exercise, symptom
control, and fluid balance, and by alerting the medical team early to any potential
deterioration.
Palliative care
The very poor prognosis associated with heart failure begs the question of the
availability of hospice care and end-of-life support for this population. The irony
remains that while cancer patients receive end-of-life support and often report
dyspnea as an equivalent problem to pain, many more heart failure patients whose
chief symptom is dyspnea have a poorer prognosis and go unattended. The
management of these patients is an area deserving of more investigation and
analysis. For example, what is the place of drugs that are known to help symptoms
but which might increase the risk of sudden death (eg, inotropes)? Does “dual-
intent” apply? What are the wishes of the patient? As cardiology becomes more
technological there is less focus on patients and more on their lesions and the tools
used to treat them. Generalists are almost certainly better than cardiologists at
practising holistic care.
Unfortunately, conventional drugs for the treatment of heart failure do not
adequately control the most common symptoms of fatigue and dyspnea. The latter
is the most common distressing symptom in refractory heart failure. Maintaining
a very close control of plasma volume is facilitated by regular weighing and
adjustment of diuresis, but this rarely provides full symptom control. Fortunately,
relief is possible through the use of opiates. These drugs reduce preload and
afterload, dampen the central respiratory drive, and relieve distress through a
central narcotic action. Thus, they are well suited for use in this situation.
Drawbacks, such as tolerance and dependence, should not deter their use as
studies suggest that they are minimal in this setting. Physical dependence is
inevitable, but only relevant in the case of discontinuation of therapy, in which case
it can be managed by gradual withdrawal. Morphine can be given at a dose of
2.5mg 4 hourly and as required, with the 4-hourly dose readjusted after 48 hours
to take account of interim dosing. Control of constipation should always
accompany chronic opioid treatment.
108
--- Страница 120 ---
Heart failure
Further reading
Jong P, Demers C, McKelvie RS et al. Angiotensin receptor blockers in heart failure: meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol2002;39:463–70.
Krumholz HM, Baker DW, Ashton CM et al. Evaluating quality of care for patients with heart
failure. Circulation2000;101:E122–40.
Niebauer J, Volk HD, Kemp M et al. Endotoxin and immune activation in chronic heart
failure: a prospective cohort study. Lancet1999;353:1838–42.
Nolan J. A historical review of heart failure. Scott Med J1993;38:53–7.
Task Force of the Working Group on Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology.
The treatment of heart failure. Eur Heart J1997;18:736–53.
109
--- Страница 121 ---
110
--- Страница 122 ---
Chapter 8
Arrhythmia
Introduction
Arrhythmia is an area of cardiology often feared by generalists. This might be
related to the inconsistent terminology used in different centers and countries; or
perhaps because the most basic tool of diagnosis, the electrocardiogram (ECG),
can at times seem the most esoteric. Whatever the reason, few feel completely
comfortable when confronted with a patient with ongoing arrhythmia. Despite this,
arrhythmia can be simply managed by asking the following question: is the patient
compromised? This is the first and single most important question in the
management of your patient. The answer will guide your next steps.
If the patient is not compromised – no pain, no dyspnea, normal blood pressure,
and fully alert – you have some time. Take a short history and examination, get the
patient monitored (preferably), and acquire a 12-lead ECG. The findings will help
to make a diagnosis that will guide treatment. If a 12-lead ECG is not available,
immediately refer the patient to somewhere that it can be performed.
If the patient is compromised – with pain, dyspnea, hypotension, and light
headedness – this is an emergency and the patient needs an intravenous (IV)
cannula inserted and a defibrillator brought in immediately. Treatment then
depends on the diagnosis (see Table 1).
Clinical examination can help, whether an ECG is available or not. The key thing
to remember is that there are few components in the electrical “wiring” of the heart
(see Figure 1) and the pulse can only be fast or slow, regular or irregular. If an ECG
is available, is the QRS complex narrow or broad? Broad (>0.12 seconds) is more
likely to be ventricular tachycardia (VT) and will generally be more concerning than
narrow, which suggests a high depolarization site and is likely to be
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT).
Bradycardia
Bradycardia is defined as heart rate <60 bpm, regardless of the cause. However,
this is not a particularly helpful definition as it is well known that elite athletes can
have “normal” heart rates as low as 30 bpm. In general, bradycardia needs
111
--- Страница 123 ---
Chapter 8
Pulse Most likely diagnosis ECG to rule out
Regular and slow Sinus rhythm Complete heart block
(~60bpm) Junctional rhythm
Regular and fast Atrial flutter with 2:1 AV block Ventricular tachycardia
(~150bpm)
Regular and fast AV node re-entrant tachycardia Ventricular tachycardia
(>150bpm)
Irregular and fast Atrial fibrillation with rapid Ventricular tachycardia
ventricular response
Irregular and slow Atrial fibrillation with controlled Ventricular tachycardia
ventricular response
Table 1.Possible diagnoses of an arrhythmic patient. AV: atrioventricular;
ECG: electrocardiogram.
Bundle of His
SA node
Left bundle branch
AV node
Right bundle branch
Figure 1.A diagrammatic representation of the electrical “wiring” of the heart.
AV: atrioventricular; SA: sinoatrial. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier Science
(Hampton J. The ECG Made Easy. Churchill Livingstone, 2003).
attention if it is associated with symptoms, hemodynamic compromise, or is the
substrate for escape rhythms. Symptoms associated with bradycardia include
shortness of breath, fatigue, lethargy, nausea, mental confusion, dizziness, and
presyncope or syncope. If there is hemodynamic compromise and interruption of
cerebral perfusion is prolonged, grand mal seizures may result (Stokes–Adams
attacks). The causes of bradycardia are outlined in Table 2.
112
--- Страница 124 ---
Arrhythmia
Causes of bradycardia
Physiological Sinus node disease
•Athletic bradycardia Atrioventricular node disease
Drugs Abnormal vagal tone
•Beta-blockers Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
•Rate-limiting calcium-channel blockers Malignant vasovagal syndrome
•Digoxin Raised intracranial pressure
•Amiodarone Hypothyroidism
Ischemia Hypothermia
Table 2.Causes of bradycardia.
Treatment
Acute bradycardia only requires treatment if it is associated with hemodynamic
compromise or dangerous escape rhythms. This will most often be the case in the
setting of inferior myocardial infarction (MI), but check the temperature! IV
atropine at a dose of 500mg can be administered and repeated up to a maximum
cumulative dose of 3mg. If this fails, there are two options.
(1) External pacing. This is a temporizing measure only. Most defibrillators have
detachable modules to facilitate this. Attach electrode gels anteriorly and
posteriorly and pace at 80bpm. The procedure is distressing for the conscious
patient and should be used with sedative analgesia.
(2) IV isoproterenol (isoprenaline) infusion. If the parasympathetic system is
entirely blocked, the only alternative is to stimulate the sympathetic pathway.
However, this is proarrhythmic and not without risk.
Sinus node dysfunction
Sinus node dysfunction (SND) is also known as tachycardia–bradycardia syndrome
and sick sinus syndrome. These terms encompass a spectrum of disorders of
cardiac conduction tissue that are not necessarily confined to the sinus node
(eg, atrial conducting tissue and even the atrioventricular [AV] node). The cause is
not entirely clear, but inflammation, degeneration, and fibrosis of the conducting
tissue are characteristic. SND is most common in the elderly.
The spectrum of associated arrhythmias is diverse, but usually includes
inappropriate sinus bradycardia, sinus pauses (>3 seconds) with junctional
escape, sinus arrest (asystolic pause), atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter, and atrial
fibrillation (AF). Commonly, there is alternating bradycardia–tachycardia with a
normal sinus rate or bradycardia between attacks. Hence, the diagnostic landmarks
113
--- Страница 125 ---
Chapter 8
are palpitations (tachycardia), dizziness, and syncope (bradycardia), although the
disease is often asymptomatic.
SND is diagnosed by a 12-lead ECG and Holter monitoring. Although there is no
evidence of mortality benefit (SND does not seem to cause fatal asystolic arrest),
consensus exists that a pacemaker (AAI, DDD – see p.135 for a description of the
pacemaker codes) should be implanted if there is a clear relationship between
bradycardia and cerebral symptoms in the absence of drugs – a diagnosis that may
be difficult to secure. In addition, a pacemaker may be considered (AAI, DDD)
when bradycardia is secondary to drug therapy necessary to limit tachycardia.
Carotid sinus syndrome
This term refers to hypersensitivity of the baroreceptor reflex, leading to
bradycardia and hypotension. It is usually caused when pressure is applied to the
neck around the area of the carotid sinus, eg, when shaving or by wearing a tight
shirt collar. It can be predominantly cardioinhibitory (bradycardia, AV block) or
vasodepressive (hypotension). Diagnosis is by ECG monitoring during carotid
sinus massage. Patients with >3 seconds of asystole benefit from permanent
dual-chamber pacing (DDI). Single-lead atrial pacing is contraindicated because it
offers no protection against AV block. In patients with predominant vasodepressor
syncope or mixed forms of the condition, pacing only prevents symptoms due
to asystole or bradyarrhythmia; it does not prevent neurologic symptoms due to
reflex hypotension.
Syncope
Syncope is defined as a sudden transient loss of consciousness and postural tone
with spontaneous recovery. A careful diagnostic evaluation, though often difficult,
is imperative in all patients. A vast variety of conditions may result in syncope,
including any condition causing relative cerebral hypoxia for ≥10 seconds.
It occurs as a result of low cardiac output and can be a consequence of mechanical,
rhythm, and vascular disturbances, and noncardiac causes (see Table 3).
It should be kept in mind that generalized tonic/clonic movements can be the
result of syncope, rather than the cause of it.
Evaluation
It can be difficult to identify the cause of syncope. Initial clinical evaluation should
include supine and erect blood pressures and heart rate measurements. Blood
glucose, serum electrolytes, hematocrit, and drug levels (if appropriate) should also be
obtained. Assessment of a syncopal event requires information from both the patient
and a witness; the pattern can be helpful (see Table 4). A baseline 12-lead ECG may
suggest possible causes such as ischemia, Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome,
114
--- Страница 126 ---
Arrhythmia
Type of disturbance Examples
Mechanical Cardiac valvular disease
Acute myocardial infarction
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Tamponade
Pulmonary embolus
Rhythm Sinus node dysfunction
Bradycardia
Tachycardia
Vascular Cerebrovascular disorders
Neurally mediated vasodilatation:
•malignant vasovagal syndrome
•carotid sinus syncope
•drug-induced
Noncardiac causes Central nervous system substrates,
eg, epilepsy, tumor
Metabolic/endocrine disturbances,
eg, hypoglycemia, hyperventilation
Psychiatric disorders
Table 3.Disturbances that can lead to syncope.
or a prolonged QT interval. In most cases, it will be necessary to refer the patient for
additional testing (see Figure 2). Additional testing may include the following.
• Documentation of a symptomatic arrhythmia may be achieved by
Holter monitoring. However, if syncope is infrequent, event-recorder
monitoring may be more helpful. These devices allow patients to turn
the device on when the episode begins (or ends, facilitated by the use
of a buffer), and thus record over a much greater period of time.
• An echocardiogram should be used to detect major structural
abnormalities potentially associated with syncope (aortic stenosis,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, ischemia). Carotid sinus massage
should be performed if bruits are absent.
• Before invasive electrophysiological testing, coronary artery disease
should be excluded or treated. Electrophysiological testing is indicated
whenever an arrhythmia is considered as a probable cause of syncope.
• Exercise testing may contribute to establishing a basis for syncope by
revealing myocardial ischemia (substrate for ventricular tachyarrhythmias),
catecholamine-sensitive tachycardias, exercise-induced AV block,
and chronotropic incompetence (SND).
115
--- Страница 127 ---
Chapter 8
Arrhythmia Vasovagal Neurogenic
Premonitory Often none Cough, micturition, Headache, confusion,
standing, neck aura
extension
Episode Sudden Collapse, pale, Fit, eg, tongue biting,
collapse unconscious incontinence
<1 minute
Recovery Feels well Feels ill Often prolonged
postictal phase
Table 4.Patterns of syncope.
(Pre)syncope
history and exam
Cardiological Neurological
¥ 24—72 hour ECG ¥ EEG
¥ Echocardiography ¥ Carotid Doppler
¥ EP study ¥ CT/MRI
¥ Exercise testing
¥ Coronary angiography
Tilt-table testing
Figure 2.Evaluation of syncope. CT: computed tomography; ECG: electrocardiogram;
EEG: electroencephalogram; EP: electrophysiology; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging.
Malignant vasovagal syncope
In malignant vasovagal syncope, the sympathetic system is activated via a trigger,
usually venous pooling, which forces vigorous contraction of a poorly filled
ventricle. This stimulates the mechanoreceptors in the ventricular wall, which lead
(via C fibers and the brainstem) to overactivation of the parasympathetic system,
and thus bradycardia and hypotension. This reflex is named Bezold–Jarisch after
those who first described it (see Figure 3).
116
--- Страница 128 ---
Arrhythmia
C
fibers
Brainstem
Vigorous + Vagal efferents Hypotension
contraction
of a poorly
filled ventricle
Sympathetic
activation
Venous pooling Bradycardia
Figure 3.The Bezold–Jarisch reflex.
Tilt-table testing
If malignant vasovagal syncope is suspected, the key investigation is upright tilt-table
testing. This test is performed on a specially designed table with the patient initially
in a supine position. He/she is then tilted upright to a maximum of 60°–80°in such
a way as to avoid recruiting the postural muscles. This maximizes venous pooling.
The patient is left in this position for up to 40minutes.
The normal tilt-table response is a baroreceptor-mediated decrease in inhibitory
drive to the vasomotor center, ie, vasoconstriction and an increase in heart rate and
ventricular contractility. The test result is considered abnormal when symptomatic
hypotension is reproduced (Bezold–Jarisch reflex).
Treatment
Therapy to prevent recurrent vasovagal syncope has included the use of b-blockers
and vagolytics (eg, disopyramide).
Atrioventricular block
AV block occurs when the electrical impulse from the atria to the ventricles is
delayed or blocked.
117
--- Страница 129 ---
Chapter 8
First-degree AV block
This is where there is a prolonged PR interval of >200 milliseconds (5 small
squares; see Figure 4). No specific therapy is required and the prognosis is
excellent. However, it can be a marker for an underlying problem such as
myocarditis, MI, degenerative disease, or, most commonly, a drug effect
(eg, tricyclic antidepressants).
Second-degree AV block
This is divided into two types:
• type I (Mobitz I or Wenckebach AV block)
• type II (Mobitz II AV block)
Type I occurs when there is a repeated pattern of progressive prolongation of the
PR interval, which eventually results in the failure of conduction of one atrial beat
(see Figure 5). The cause is usually benign, but it can be a marker for the same
underlying cardiac problems as first-degree AV block. In most cases, treatment is
unnecessary. Routine prophylactic permanent pacing is not recommended unless
the patient is symptomatic with presyncope, recurrent syncope, or bradycardia that
exacerbates congestive heart failure or angina.
In type II, most beats are conducted with a constant PR interval, but occasionally
atrial depolarization is not followed by ventricular depolarization (see Figure 6).
Type II is pathological and indicates disease of the conduction system distal to the
AV node. It can frequently lead to complete AV block, causing Stokes–Adams
attacks. Therefore, temporary and then permanent pacing (DDD) is indicated in
most patients, even those who initially present without symptoms.
Third-degree AV block (complete heart block)
With complete heart block, there is complete dissociation of the P waves and QRS
complexes (see Figure 7). The ventricular escape complexes are usually wide and
occur at around 30–40 bpm. There is a significant risk of asystole and thus
permanent pacing (DDD) is indicated, regardless of symptoms. Acquired AV block
is most commonly due to ischemic heart disease or drug toxicity (in particular
b-blockers, digitalis, and calcium-channel blockers).
Bradyarrhythmia in atrial fibrillation
In patients with intermittent or chronic AF, AV node dysfunction is not an
uncommon finding. Clearly, this will be aggravated by many of the rate-limiting
drugs given to control the ventricular rate. In these cases, consideration should be
given to the implantation of a pacemaker to protect against bradycardia while still
allowing pharmacological control of a rapid ventricular rate.
118
--- Страница 130 ---
Arrhythmia
Figure 4.Electrocardiogram of first-degree atrioventricular block.
Figure 5.Electrocardiogram of type I second-degree atrioventricular block (Wenckebach).
Figure 6.Electrocardiogram of type II second-degree atrioventricular block (Mobitz II).
Figure 7.Electrocardiogram of third-degree atrioventricular block.
119
--- Страница 131 ---
Chapter 8
Left bundle branch block Right bundle branch block
V1 V6 V1 V6
Figure 8.Electrocardiogram patterns of left bundle branch block and right bundle
branch block.
Bundle branch block
A problem in the bundle of His presents in an identical fashion to a combined
block of both bundles, ie, complete heart block. However, a more common
occurrence is an isolated left or right bundle branch block. These are usually
distinct from any problem with AV conduction (ie, they usually coexist with
normal sinus rhythm [SR]). The patterns of the ECG are characteristic, but highly
variable; the hallmark is a wide QRS complex.
• In left bundle branch block (LBBB), the pattern is best detected
in V6 where there is an “M” pattern, while in V1 there is a “W”
pattern (see Figure 8).
• In right bundle branch block (RBBB), the pattern is best detected
in V1 where there is an RSR complex, while in V6 there is a
QRS complex (see Figure 8).
In fact, both LBBB and RBBB are found in the “normal” population. New LBBB
is cause for concern, and if it can clearly be related to an acute episode of chest
pain then it probably indicates MI. Both RBBB and LBBB probably indicate
increased risk for cardiovascular disease; however, neither on its own is an
indication for pacing.
Fascicular block
One confusing aspect of electrocardiology is the terminology used to describe
blocks of the fascicles (see Figure 9). The confusion arises from the fact that the
right bundleis included in the list of three fascicles:
• left anterior fascicle
• left posterior fascicle
• right bundle branch
120
--- Страница 132 ---
Arrhythmia
Bundle of His
Posterior fascicular block
Right Anterior fascicular block
bundle
block
Figure 9.Fascicular block.
Left anterior and left posterior fascicular block
Fascicular block causes axis deviation on the ECG. Therefore, left anterior
hemiblock causes left axis deviation (see Figure 10), while left posterior hemiblock
causes right axis deviation (see Figure 11).
Bifascicular block
The term “bifascicular block” refers to a block of any two of the three fascicles.
Clearly, this shouldinclude LBBB (left anterior + left posterior); however, the term
is usually reserved for:
• RBBB + left anterior hemiblock, ie, RBBB + left axis deviation
• RBBB + left posterior hemiblock, ie, RBBB + right axis deviation
(the axis is usually normal in RBBB)
Bifascicular block is not in itself an indication for pacing. However, when combined
with intermittent second- or third-degree block, a DDD pacemaker should
be fitted.
Trifascicular block
Trifascicular block refers to a block of all three fascicles (but with intact AV
conduction). It usually refers to LBBB + a long PR interval. Although trifascicular
block is not strictly speaking an indication for permanent pacing, some centers
carry this out on the basis that it must reflect extensive conducting tissue damage.
121
--- Страница 133 ---
CH7_FIG10
Chapter 8
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 10.Left axis deviation.
Nonspecific intraventricular conduction defect
Another term that is sometimes used is “nonspecific intraventricular conduction
defect”. This usually refers to an abnormal ECG that does not clearly fit any
of the patterns described above. The QRS complex will generally not be wide,
but the waveform will be atypical. It is of unknown significance, but is likely
to be benign.
Tachyarrhythmia
The general principle of patient management outlined at the beginning of this
chapter holds true for patients suffering from tachyarrhythmia: is the patient
compromised? And, as above, the use of an ECG will be critical when making the
diagnosis. However, you will often be called to see a patient in the community
where no ECG is available. In this situation, try to make a diagnosis based on the
defibrillator monitor. Most patients with tachyarrhythmia will require referral, but
making your own diagnosis can only help the situation. The key questions are:
• do the results show broad (>0.12 seconds) or narrow complexes?
• are they regular or irregular?
More sophisticated interpretation of the ECG is helpful, but the answers to these
key questions will be sufficient to guide the immediate management (see Table5).
122
--- Страница 134 ---
Arrhythmia
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 11.Right axis deviation.
Sinus tachycardia
Sinus tachycardia is usually a response to physiological stress such as exercise or
anxiety, and it may be the result of an abnormally heightened sympathetic tone.
Abnormal pathological causes include fever, hypotension, anemia, thyrotoxicosis,
hypovolemia, pulmonary emboli, myocardial ischemia, and shock. Nicotine,
caffeine, alcohol, and some medications (sympathetic agonists or
parasympatholytic agents) are frequently the underlying cause of sinus tachycardia.
The QRS complexes are preceded by P waves of normal morphology, duration, and
axis. Sinus tachycardia alone does not require any treatment, but the underlying
cause should be determined.
Atrial tachycardia
Atrial tachycardia can occur in the presence of cardiac or pulmonary disease at a
rate varying from 140 to 240 bpm. P-wave morphology is generally different from
that during SR, but the P–QRS relationship remains 1:1 (see Figure 12).
Some atrial tachycardias are catecholamine sensitive; in this case, a b-blocker is
appropriate therapy. Curative radiofrequency ablation of atrial tachycardia is
effective in 70% of cases. For refractory cases, creation of complete heart block by
radiofrequency catheter ablation with implantation of a permanent dual-chamber
pacemaker provides control of the rate and avoids drug toxicity.
123
--- Страница 135 ---
Chapter 8
Shape of complex Diagnosis
Irregular narrow complex Atrial fibrillation
Atrial flutter (sawtooth pattern)
Multifocal atrial tachycardia (distinct P waves,
but with different morphologies)
Regular narrow complex Sinus tachycardia
Atrial flutter with constant AV block
AVNRT
Accessory pathway re-entrant tachycardia
Irregular broad complex Atrial fibrillation + LBBB/RBBB
Atrial fibrillation + other aberrant conduction
Regular broad complex Sinus tachycardia + LBBB/RBBB
Atrial flutter with constant AV block + LBBB/RBBB
Ventricular tachycardia
Table 5.Possible diagnoses of tachyarrhythmias based on the electrocardiogram.
AV: atrioventricular; AVNRT: atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia; LBBB:
left bundle branch block; RBBB: right bundle branch block.
Figure 12.Electrocardiogram of atrial tachycardia.
Atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia
AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) accounts for more than 70% of cases of
paroxysmal SVT (see Figures 13 and 14). This is also termed “classic” SVT with
fast (140–250 bpm) narrow complexes and no P waves. Initial management
involves interventions to increase vagal tone. These should only be carried out on
a monitored patient, and include:
• carotid sinus massage – apply firm pressure to one carotid artery at the
level of the upper thyroid cartilage and move a small distance back and
forth for up to 5seconds (check for bruits first)
• Valsalva maneuver – the patient should take a deep breath, then attempt
to exhale forcefully against a closed glottis for up to 15seconds
124
--- Страница 136 ---
Arrhythmia
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 13.Electrocardiogram of atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia.
• diving reflex – this vestigial reflex, which allows marine animals to
lower their metabolism when diving underwater, exists in humans and
can increase vagal tone. Suddenly immerse the patient’s face in very
cold water
In a number of patients, the tachycardia (ie, AVNRT) terminates spontaneously with
these maneuvers. However, if it does not, you should consider an adenosine
challenge. This procedure involves rapid IV injections of increasing doses of
adenosine (3–16mg). Adenosine has a very short half-life (10seconds) and produces
temporary AV block, which can interrupt re-entry. This procedure is also very useful
diagnostically, as the transient AV block can unmask an underlying atrial rhythm.
The use of a short-acting b-blocker (eg, esmolol) or a calcium-channel blocker
(eg,verapamil) has also been found to be safe and effective in terminating AVNRT.
Verapamil is particularly useful in patients with asthma, in whom adenosine
is contraindicated.
Symptomatic patients with frequent episodes of AVNRT can be considered for
radiofrequency catheter ablation of the “slow” pathway; this can be successfully
ablated in more than 95% of cases.
Ventricular pre-excitation
Pre-excitation is defined as an early depolarization of the ventricular myocardium
that occurs prior to any conduction through the AV node. The most common
condition in which this is seen is WPW syndrome, where there is an accessory AV
125
--- Страница 137 ---
Chapter 8
(a) Pre-excitation
SR VT
Accessory
pathway
AVN AVN
Delta
wave
Short PR
interval
(b) AVNRT
AVN AVN
Regular
narrow
complex
No P waves
Figure 14.Mechanisms of re-entrant tachycardia. AVN: atrioventricular node; AVNRT:
atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia; SR: sinus rhythm; VT: ventricular tachycardia.
pathway called the bundle of Kent. The anomalous conducting system can be
located anywhere around the mitral or tricuspid rings. Most WPW patients have
no evidence of structural heart disease. In the majority of cases, there is only a
single accessory connection and the electrophysiological properties of the
anomalous pathway differ from those of the AV node. Conduction through the
accessory connection is faster and is independent of the heart rate. Consequently,
the ventricular myocardium is activated from two directions: through the normal
system and through the accessory pathway. The resulting QRS complex is a
product of fusion of the two distinct activation wavefronts. Since conduction over
the accessory pathway is faster, the initial part of the QRS complex represents
ventricular activation through this route (delta wave – see Figure 15).
126
--- Страница 138 ---
Arrhythmia
I aVR V1 V4
II aVL V2 V5
III aVF V3 V6
Figure 15.Electrocardiogram of Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome.
The medical treatment of acute arrhythmias in WPW syndrome depends on the
type of tachycardia. ECG results can help to determine this. A narrow complex
indicates that accessory pathway re-entry is occurring. Treatment should include
vagal maneuvers and adenosine as above. A broad complex is likely to be seen
when AF is present, and can be particularly dangerous in WPW syndrome. It is
characterized by rapid, irregular, wide complexes and should be treated by
immediate direct current (DC) cardioversion. Adenosine, verapamil, and digoxin
are not appropriate treatments as they increase the possibility of VT.
Following acute therapy, radiofrequency catheter ablation can be used as a curative
treatment for symptomatic patients with an accessory pathway. Pathways can be
successfully ablated in more than 90% of all cases and the recurrence rate after
successful ablation is approximately 8%–10%. Severe complications are rare,
occurring in 2% of all cases.
IN THE BEGINNING…
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome was first described by Frank Norman
Wilson in 1915. Another case in a 19-year-old student was reported by Wedd
in 1921, and Louis Wolff, John Parkinson, and Paul Dudley White alluded to
these two descriptions when they described the disorder in 1930. The original
article by these three authors contained an account of a form of bundle branch
block in 11 healthy young adults who were subject to episodes of paroxysmal
tachycardia. The relative contributions of the authors are uncertain. Wolff
(1898–1972) and White (1886–1973) were both US cardiologists, while
Parkinson (1885–1976) was an English physician: one patient had been seen
at the London Hospital, while most of the others were examined in Boston.
White was a giant of cardiology – he studied the ECG with Thomas Lewis and
was a strong advocate of heart disease prevention through exercise, especially
bicycle exercise. A bike path in Boston is named after him.
127
--- Страница 139 ---
Chapter 8
Figure 16.Electrocardiogram of ventricular tachycardia.
Ventricular tachycardia
In the acute situation, broad complex tachycardias present a diagnostic challenge
because SVT with aberrant conduction can be difficult to distinguish from VT.
As mentioned previously, the key question remains – is the patient compromised?
Certain features on the ECG can help to distinguish VT from SVT (see Figure 16):
• a very broad QRS complex (>0.14seconds)
• AV dissociation (but Pwaves are often difficult to distinguish in broad
complex tachycardias)
• concordance (all QRS complexes in V1–V6 are either positive or negative)
• fusion beats
• capture beats
However, the key test is an adenosine challenge, which will interrupt an SVT but
have no effect on VT. If VT is clear from the ECG or adenosine challenge has no
effect and the patient is compromised, immediate DC cardioversion is needed.
If there is time, a short-acting induction agent should be administered (or IV
midazolam can be used). If the patient is losing consciousness, even this can be
bypassed. Finally, if the patient loses their pulse, the cardiac arrest protocol should
be immediately instituted (see Chapter 1, Cardiac arrest).
If the patient is only mildly compromised or suffering recurrent episodes, other
therapeutic options are:
• IV amiodarone
• IV magnesium
• IV lidocaine (lignocaine) (no left ventricular [LV] dysfunction)
• overdrive pacing (this needs a temporary wire. The stimulator rate is
turned up above the VT rate [usually ×3] to “capture” ventricular
depolarization, and then gradually turned down)
128
--- Страница 140 ---
Arrhythmia
Figure 17.Electrocardiogram showing torsades de pointes.
The chronic investigation and management of VT will be carried out by a specialist
(and probably a cardiologist with a special interest in electrophysiology).
Investigation will center on finding a cause of VT. In the acute situation, there is
often an obvious precipitating event (eg, MI). However, the most common cause
of recurrent VT is ischemic heart disease. Another key aspect of the investigation
will be distinguishing between polymorphic and monomorphic VT. The former, in
which complexes vary within or between episodes in their pattern, has a stronger
association with sudden death. In difficult cases of VT, invasive electrophysiological
testing (often with concurrent coronary angiography) is warranted.
Control of chronic VT is pharmacological – typical drugs that are used include
sotalol, flecainide, amiodarone, propafenone, and disopyramide – although
radiofrequency ablation of the right ventricular (RV) outflow tract VT can be
successful, and in some cases an automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator
(AICD) can save lives.
Ventricular ectopics
Ventricular ectopics, sometimes known as ventricular premature beats, are common
in the general population. The shape of the complex is highly variable and depends
on the ventricular source. Their significance is debated. They can be a marker of
coronary disease and increased risk, but, without a precipitating cause, treatment
generally does not lower risk. Electrolyte abnormalities should be excluded.
If ventricular ectopics appear frequently during exercise (eg, an exercise tolerance
test), the patient should be investigated further for coronary artery disease.
Torsades de pointes
This is a form of polymorphic VT that occurs when the SR shown on an ECG has
a prolonged QT interval. The ECG exhibits a continuously changing axis (hence,
“turning of points”; see Figure 17), which can look like ventricular fibrillation
(VF). The prolonged QT interval can be caused by:
129
--- Страница 141 ---
Chapter 8
Definition Duration of atrial fibrillation
Paroxysmal Up to 7 days
Persistent Longer than 7 days
Permanent Cardioversion failed or not attempted
Table 6.Classification of atrial fibrillation.
• antiarrhythmic agents
• hypokalemia
• hypomagnesemia
• bradycardia
However, in very rare cases it may be congenital (Jervell and Lange–Nielsen
syndrome or Romano–Ward syndrome).
Atrial fibrillation
AF is the single most common cardiac arrhythmia. It is a condition where there is
disorganized electrical and mechanical activity of the atria with a mechanism of
multiple re-entrant wavelets. It may be chronic or occur in a paroxysmal fashion
(see Table 6). On the ECG, it is recognized as an irregular rhythm with absent
Pwaves (see Figure 18). Low-amplitude wavelets are frequently seen, but in many
cases the baseline is flat. Usually, the ventricular response is controlled by the
physiological conduction delay of the AV node and the ventricular response is
slower in patients with diseases of the conducting system, in the elderly, or in
individuals receiving medications that impair AV nodal conduction (eg, b-blockers,
digitalis, or calcium-channel blockers). With intense sympathetic stimulation, it
may be as rapid as 160–180bpm.
The clinical manifestations of AF range from a complete absence of symptoms
(usually in the young and fit) to hemodynamic collapse (in the elderly or those
with systolic dysfunction). In addition to symptoms of palpitations, patients with
AF have an increased risk of stroke and may also develop decreased exercise
tolerance and LV dysfunction. The incidence of AF increases with age and its
development is concentrated in patients with hypertensive heart disease,
congestive heart failure, and rheumatic heart disease; the association with coronary
artery disease is not as strong as with these other conditions. Among the
noncardiac causes of AF, the association is strongest with hyperthyroidism,
electrolyte abnormalities, and alcohol excess.
The patient with newly discovered AF
You will often be faced with a patient presenting with or without symptoms of AF,
and an ECG showing the classic irregular rhythm with a flat or irregular baseline
130
--- Страница 142 ---
Arrhythmia
Figure 18.Electrocardiogram of atrial fibrillation with irregular rhythm and absent P waves.
(see Figure 18). The approach to management is guided, as before, by the clinical
picture – is the patient compromised? If the answer is yes, you should
refer immediately.
If not, you then have to decide whether the AF is persistent or paroxysmal
(see Figure 19). A large proportion of patients experience spontaneous
cardioversion within 24–48hours of AF onset, but it is rarely clear whether this is
their first episode. The best approach is to teach the patient to take his or her own
pulse and monitor its regularity. This way, you can gain some idea of how long the
patient spends in AF and in SR over the next few days.
If they spontaneously cardiovert, chronic treatment of paroxysmal AF takes
three forms:
• anticoagulation
• rate control (if necessary)
• antiarrhythmics (the choice of which is guided by symptoms)
Most recent studies show that even patients with paroxysmal AF or successful
cardioversion should remain on anticoagulation (warfarin, international
normalized ratio [INR] 2–3) since these individuals have a greater risk of
cerebrovascular events than of bleeding complications.
The use of rate control and antiarrhythmics is also individualized – some patients
will require neither. However, a good choice is a beta-blocker (eg, carvedilol,
metoprolol), which can impact both of these factors. Another choice for patients
with heart failure or hypertension associated with AF is flecainide (in the absence
of coronary artery disease) or amiodarone (if coronary artery disease is present).
If, several days following chronic treatment, patients remain in AF, there are two
avenues of management: accept progression to permanent AF (and attend to rate
control and anticoagulation) or attempt cardioversion.
131
--- Страница 143 ---
Chapter 8
Newly discovered
AF
Paroxysmal Persistent
No therapy needed
unless severe
symptoms (eg,
Rate control and
hypotension, HF, Accept
anticoagulation
angina pectoris) permanent AF
as needed
Rate control and Consider
Anticoagulation
anticoagulation antiarrhythmic
as needed
as needed drug therapy
Cardioversion
Long-term
antiarrhythmic
drug therapy
unnecessary
Figure 19.Pharmacological management of patients with newly discovered atrial
fibrillation (AF). HF: heart failure. Reproduced with permission from the European Society
of Cardiology (Fuster V, Ryden LE, Asinger RW. ACC/AHA/ESC Guidelines for the
Managment of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation. Eur Heart J2001;22:1852–923).
132
--- Страница 144 ---
Arrhythmia
Deciding between the two (the decision will often be in the hands of the
cardiologist) is influenced by several factors:
• How long has AF been present?
• How likely is SR to be maintained?
• What is the risk of thromboembolism?
• How severe are the symptoms?
Patients with longstanding AF or AF caused by structural abnormalities are least
likely to stay in SR. Most cardiologists would agree that every patient should have
one attempt at restoration of SR. However, this is not always the best policy. For
example, in an elderly patient with asymptomatic, rate-controlled AF, the toxicity
of antiarrhythmics may outweigh the benefit of restoration of SR.
The following points regarding treatment are helpful when treating a patient
with AF.
• Regardless of the treatment strategy, all patients should have an ECG,
chest x-ray, echo, and testing of thyroid function.
• If the decision is made to accept permanent AF, then control the rate
with a combination of digoxin, a b-blocker, or a rate-limiting calcium-
channel antagonist, and anticoagulate with warfarin, aiming for an INR
of 2–3. The INR should be determined weekly (at least) in the initial
stages and monthly thereafter. Patients over the age of 75years who are
considered at high risk for bleeding complications can be targeted to a
lower INR of 2. In patients with contraindications to full anticoagulation,
a daily dose of 300mg aspirin can be used as an alternative to warfarin.
• If elective cardioversion is to be attempted, patients should be
anticoagulated for 4 weeks with warfarin (aim for an INR of 2–3.5) and
potassium levels should be kept in the upper normal range (>4.2 mmol)
as this increases the chance of success of the cardioversion. Cardioversion
can be electrical or chemical. If DC cardioversion is used, the patient
receives a general anesthetic with a short-acting induction agent (usually
propofol) and then receives shocks (synchronized to the R waves) of
increasing energy: 100J, 200J, 360J, and 360Jusing paddles on
the anterior and posterior chest (the patient lies on their side).
Chemical cardioversion is also possible using flecainide. In the event of successful
cardioversion, patients should continue warfarin for at least 4 weeks. This is
because the thromboembolic risk relates to “stunned” atria that do not resume
normal mechanical function during this time.
133
--- Страница 145 ---
Chapter 8
FAMOUS SCOTS
The first insight into the mechanism of irregular pulse in atrial fibrillation was
provided by James Mackenzie, a Scottish GP who used an ink polygraph to
record and label jugular venous pulses. He noticed that the jugular “a” wave
was lost when patients went from a normal to an irregular rhythm.
New directions in the management of atrial fibrillation
It has recently been established that triggers in pulmonary veins can initiate AF and
that circumferential or segmental disconnection of these veins at the left atrial
junction can provide effective therapy. In certain patients, success rates for catheter-
based pulmonary vein isolation range from 70% to 90%, but more than one
procedure is often necessary. Surgery for AF is now usually reserved for use as an
adjunctive treatment in patients having mitral or coronary surgery. Nevertheless, the
large experience of the Maze procedure provides an important source of information
to guide those performing catheter ablation. The Maze procedure was designed to
exclude any place in the atria where the macro re-entrant circuits that underlie AF
can form. Until recently, this involved an extensive series of atrial incisions, but the
more recent cryosurgical Maze is just as effective and technically less demanding.
Atrial flutter
Atrial flutter is a rapid, regular rhythm with atrial rates of 250–350 bpm.
The ventricular response rate varies, but it is usually a 2:1 block (creating the classic
150 bpm regular ventricular rhythm). The ECG pattern is typical – classic flutter
waves are positive in the inferior leads and negative in lead V1 (see Figure20).
Overall, atrial flutter is managed very much like AF:
• if the patient is hemodynamically compromised, one treatment option
is DC cardioversion with low energy (50–100 J)
• a relatively easy way to convert atrial flutter to SR in the hospital
setting is to use overdrive pacing in the high right atrium (RA)
• radiofrequency catheter ablation is now considered a curative
approach in patients with recurrent atrial flutter. It can be eliminated
by creating a linear lesion in the isthmus between the tricuspid annulus
and the inferior vena cava. Acute success rates of 85%–90% and
recurrence rates of 10%–15% have been reported
• patients with atrial flutter require anticoagulation therapy and,
although there is more effective atrial contraction in atrial flutter
(which may explain the decreased incidence of thromboembolism),
guidelines are similar to those for AF
134
--- Страница 146 ---
Arrhythmia
Figure 20.Electrocardiogram of atrial flutter.
Pacemakers
Implantation of a permanent electronic replacement for the heart’s natural
pacemaker began in the 1950s and is now a well-established treatment that
increases patient longevity and improves their quality of life. Since its invention,
advances in programmability, telemetry, and the ability to sense and pace two
chambers have improved the level of care that can be provided. Miniaturization has
made the process of implantation more straightforward and long-term
complications less common. Advances in pacemaker technology mean that several
new indications are likely to be added to the standard ones (see Table 7).
Pacemaker codes
Pacemaker codes are, to many, one of the most confusing aspects of
electrocardiology (see Table8). In fact, the labels, which are standardized, tell you
all you need to know about the underlying programming and, in combination with
the basic electrical wiring diagram of the heart (see Figure 1), can allow you to
diagnose most problems.
The first letter refers to the chamber or chambers paced (atrium, ventricle, both
[dual]). The second letter refers to the chamber sensed (atrium, ventricle, both
[dual]) and the third letter details the response to sensing (triggered, inhibited,
both [dual]). Thus, the most common pacemaker codes are the following.
(1) DDD – this box senses both chambers and if it detects a missing or late atrial
or ventricular contraction it will pace one or both. The most common
scenarios are:
• sinus bradycardia – atrial pacing will “kick in” and, assuming
AV conduction is normal, no ventricular pacing will occur
• AV block (Mobitz type II; third-degree) – the ventricle is paced either
following a normal atrial contraction or a paced atrial contraction. The
benefit of this – that ventricular contraction will “track” the increased
135
--- Страница 147 ---
Chapter 8
Indication Pacemaker Clear consensus
type for indication
Sick sinus syndrome bradycardia AAI, DDD Yes
Carotid sinus syndrome syncope DDI Yes
Complete heart block DDD Yes
(third-degree AV block)
Mobitz II block (second-degree AV block) DDD Yes
AF + AV block (pauses >3 seconds, VVI(R) Yes
ventricular rate <40 bpm)
Trifascicular block DDD No
Malignant vasovagal syndrome DDI No
Table 7.Standard indications for pacemakers. AF: atrial fibrillation; AV: atrioventricular.
atrial rate of exercise tachycardia – is also its biggest drawback; it will also
increase the ventricular pacing rate in the presence of abnormally increased
atrial contraction, eg, atrial tachycardia
(2) VVI – this type of box is considerably cheaper than those boxes capable
of DDD programming. It senses and paces only the ventricle and, consequently,
only requires one lead. VVI boxes are indicated for use in AF with bradycardia
and AV block, and in sinus bradycardia with no AV block. They can cause
pacemaker syndrome and retrograde atrial tachycardia. They can also trigger AF.
(3) AAI – this device senses and paces only the atrium. It does not pace if a normal
P wave is sensed. Thus, it is indicated for use in sick sinus syndrome to
prevent bradycardia.
(4) Rate-adaptive pacemakers, eg, VVI(R). Some patients do not elevate their heart
rate normally in response to exercise. This is known as chronotropic
incompetence, and is defined as a failure to elevate the heart rate to 70% of
predicted heart rate or to >100 bpm. It is most common in sick sinus
syndrome (40% of cases), but it can also occur in AF. The solution to this
condition is to use a rate-adaptive pacemaker. This type of pacemaker uses one
of three methods to detect the need for an increased heart rate and responds
accordingly. Examples of detection methods are: mechanical accelerometers
that detect movement; changes in transthoracic impedance that can be used
to detect changes in ventilation or RV filling; and QT sensors that respond to
the shortening of the paced QT interval by catecholamines.
136
--- Страница 148 ---
Arrhythmia
Paced Sensed Response Rate
A A T R
V V I
D D D
Table 8.Pacemaker codes. A: atrium; D: dual (ie, both chambers or both responses);
I: inhibited; R: rate responsive; T: triggered; V: ventricle.
Implantation
Pacemaker implantation is carried out under sedation. Leads are inserted via the
subclavian or cephalic vein into the RA and/or RV. Atrial leads are J-shaped and are
positioned in the right atrial appendage (anteriorly and superiorly in the RA).
Ventricular leads are positioned in the RV apex. Most ventricular leads are placed
in position and left against the myocardial wall. In certain circumstances, eg, when
these leads become easily displaced or do not provide adequate threshold values,
an active fixation lead can be used. This lead has a screw “thread” on its end –
usually covered by a dissolvable tip, so that it is not exposed until it is in position
– that allows the lead to be fixed into the myocardium.
After the leads are positioned, a series of tests are carried out to determine if
the lead position is satisfactory from an electrical point of view. These would
typically assess:
• threshold
– the voltage required to cause a contraction. This increases if the lead
is not well-positioned and can be a sensitive method of detecting
poor placement
• lead impedance
– this is a test of the integrity of the lead. It is essentially a measure
of electrical resistance and is measured in Ohms
• abnormal stimulation of the phrenic nerve
– a high-voltage protocol tests for a diaphragmatic twitch
THE PACEMAKER’S MAKER
Canadian John Hopps invented the first cardiac pacemaker. Hopps was trained as an
electrical engineer at the University of Manitoba and joined the National Research
Council in 1941, where he conducted research on hypothermia. While experimenting
with radiofrequency heating to restore body temperature, Hopps made an unexpected
discovery: if a heart stopped beating due to cooling, it could be started again by
artificial stimulation using mechanical or electrical means. In 1950, this led to
Hopps’ invention of the world’s first cardiac pacemaker. His device was far too large
to be implanted inside the human body – it was an external pacemaker.
137
--- Страница 149 ---
Chapter 8
Once all the required tests are completed, the pacemaker pocket (in the fascia
overlying the pectoral muscle) is created by blunt dissection and the wound sutured.
Complications
Acute complications will generally occur in hospital. These may include
pneumothorax, RV perforation and cardiac tamponade, and hematoma.
Chronic complications are more likely to present to the generalist. Lead infection
is fortunately rare, but can present a very difficult management problem. Skin
commensals are the most common culprits in right-sided endocarditis. If you
suspect this, you should immediately refer the patient for an echo and blood
cultures. Treatment is initially with antibiotics, but the lead system should be
quickly replaced if this is unsuccessful.
Lead displacement can occur as a result of concurrent right-sided pathology, eg, RV
dilatation or valve abnormalities, and can be detected by changes in threshold.
Changes in impedance can point to deterioration of old wires or loss of insulation
properties. Subclavian vein or superior vena cava occlusion is more common with
multiple lead systems. Classic signs include unilateral superficial vein engorgement
around the upper thorax, neck, and face.
Erosion occasionally occurs if the pacemaker box becomes gradually more
superficial. Unless it causes chronic pain, or erodes completely, it does not demand
referral. Some patients move their own box back and forward under the skin
(Twiddler’s syndrome). This can cause hemorrhage or lead breaks.
Infection of the implantation site can be problematic and should be taken seriously. In
the early stage, superficial redness of the skin or swelling around the box will be
noticed. For this, standard treatment is indicated, eg, a skin swab, cloxacillin
(flucloxacillin) (oral dosage, 500 mg four times daily). If the infection does not
respond, or if you suspect deep infection for another reason, eg, marked constitutional
symptoms, refer immediately. Infections resistant to antibiotic therapy demand box
and lead extraction – a procedure not without difficulty or complications.
Pacemaker syndrome occurs in some patients with a VVI pacemaker who are in SR.
It is thought to relate to the fact that although sometimes the atria contract “in time”
and cardiac output is normal, at other times they contract against closed AV valves,
which causes elevated venous pressure and a fall in cardiac output. The patient will
experience dizziness, and the solution is to upgrade the patient to a DDD pacemaker.
Finally, atrial-sensing pacemakers, eg, DDD, respond to atrial arrhythmia with
tachycardic pacing. If this happens, it is possible to alter the program (to DDI or set
138
--- Страница 150 ---
Arrhythmia
an upper rate limit) or use antiarrhythmic drugs. This problem can be avoided by
using a mode-switching pacemaker that detects atrial arrhythmia and switches to VVI.
Pacemaker ECGs
ECGs are harder to interpret in a patient with a pacemaker as there are more
variables; although the pacing spikes are usually straightforward to recognize. It is
important to remember that the paced QRS complex will be in an LBBB pattern
because the wave of depolarization begins where the lead is placed in the RV.
Doctor, I have a pacemaker, what should I avoid?
This is a common question that patients ask. In general, patients should live life as
normal. They should avoid magnetic resonance imaging studies, and care should
be taken with the following:
• electrocautery during surgery – this can cause sensing problems
• therapeutic radiation
• cardioversion/defibrillation – this should be carried out using the
lowest effective energy with the paddles in the anterior–posterior
positions on the body of the patient
• mobile phones – these should not be placed in a shirt pocket
next to the pacemaker
• car batteries – batteries can produce large magnetic fields. Again,
this is only a problem if the person is leaning over and the pacemaker
comes close to the battery
• high-voltage cables
Most manufacturers supply each pacemaker recipient with a wallet-sized
emergency card for identification as the bearer of an implanted device. This card
should include important information about current pacing parameters, names and
numbers of the pulse generator (including leads), indication for pacing, and
underlying structural heart disease.
Patient follow-up
Application of a magnet to many pacemaker generators reveals the current battery
status by pacing with a fixed pacing rate or “magnet rate”. The pacemaker rate
decreases in most models with declining battery charge. When a decrease indicates
exhaustion of one battery capacity, the pulse generator should be replaced.
Implantable cardioverter defibrillators
The natural evolution of pacemaker technology led, in the late 1960s, to the
development of the AICD. Early versions were implanted abdominally under
139
--- Страница 151 ---
Chapter 8
general anesthesia. These boxes, now barely bigger than a VVI pacemaker, are
implanted under heavy sedation/light general anesthesia, and have revolutionized
the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. Indications for use of the device are
expanding as the evidence base grows, but at present these include VF or VT
cardiac arrest without a reversible cause; spontaneous sustained VT; syncope of
undetermined origin with hemodynamically significant sustained VT; and
nonsustained VT with prior MI or LV dysfunction. A recent study suggested that
all post-MI patients with an EF <30% should receive an ACD.
An AICD is expensive – approximately the same cost as bypass grafting – but the
device is multifunctional. It is capable of bradycardia and tachyarrhythmia
detection, overdrive pacing or defibrillation, and event memory (ie, it can “play
back” the intracardiac trace from a few minutes before the event, which is
extremely useful diagnostically).
The AICD contains a device program for termination of VT and this highlights its
versatility. It can initiate:
• burst pacing – a short burst of paced beats delivered at approximately
90% of the rate of the VT
• ramp pacing – a short burst of paced beats at a rate increasing
up to 90% of the rate of the VT (to try to achieve capture)
• low-energy shock
• high-energy shock
The programming of AICDs is sophisticated and is carried out by telemetry
(a magnet detector is placed over the unit). The energy of shock delivered by
the AICD is a magnitude less than that delivered across the chest wall by an
external defibrillator (internal 5–35 J, external 100–360 J). If an AICD delivers a
shock, it is important to refer the patient to the nearest center where the unit can
be interrogated.
Electrophysiological studies
Electrophysiology is a rapidly advancing field in which the potential indications
currently outweigh the availability of facilities. The indications for
electrophysiology are detailed in Table9.
The essence of the electrophysiological test is a measurement of the intracardiac
ECG: (1) during normal SR; (2) during an induced arrhythmia; and (3) following
premature extrastimuli.
140
--- Страница 152 ---
Arrhythmia
Potential indications for electrophysiology
Sinus node dysfunction
•to evaluate the AV node or where the link between symptoms and arrhythmia
is not secure
AV block
•suspected infranodal block (ie, pathology of the bundle of His or Purkinje fibers)
•intraventricular conduction delay
Frequent AVNRT
•especially if frequent episodes occur despite drug treatment
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome
•to characterize the accessory pathway and ablate it
Unexplained syncope
•after a negative tilt test, or in the presence of known heart disease
Cardiac arrest
•in the absence of myocardial infarction
Table 9.Potential indications for electrophysiology. AV: atrioventricular; AVNRT:
atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia.
Class Typically Mechanism Action Uses
potential
duration
1a Quinidine, Block sodium channels ↑ Supraventricular
procainamide, (short dissociation and ventricular
disopyramide time) tachycardias
Rarely used
1b Lidocaine Block sodium channels ↓ Ventricular
(lignocaine) (medium dissociation tachycardias
time) Used post-MI
1c Flecainide, Block sodium channels ↔ Ventricular
propafenone (long dissociation time) tachycardia
2 b-blockers, Abrogate sympathetic ↔ Commonly used for
(eg, atenolol) drive ventricular and
supraventricular
arrhythmias post-MI
3 Amiodarone, Inhibit potassium ↑ Commonly used for
sotalol current ventricular and
supraventricular
arrhythmias
4 Diltiazem, Block L-type calcium Block at Ventricular rate control
verapamil channels AV node Termination of SVT
Table 10.The Vaughan-Williams classification of antiarrhythmic drugs.
AV: atrioventricular; MI: myocardial infarction; SVT: supraventricular tachycardia;
↑: increase in duration; ↓: decrease in duration; ↔: no change in duration.
141
--- Страница 153 ---
Chapter 8
Inward
Na+channels
50
Inward Outward
Ca2+channels K+channels
Lidocaine
(lignocaine)
0 P2 Flecainide
Quinidine
b-Blockers
P0 Amiodarone
Sotalol
–50 P3
Threshold
P4
–100
Figure 21.Drugs used in the treatment of arrhythmia. The typical cardiac action
potential is also shown: a fast sodium current and slower calcium current depolarize
cardiac cells. The plateau phase caused by calcium entry contributes to the long refractory
period, which protects the heart from re-excitation.
Measurements are usually taken from several intracardiac sites, allowing
identification of sinus node function and recovery, sinoatrial conduction, AV nodal
conduction, and triggered ventricular arrhythmias. Treatment is with
radiofrequency stimulation, which can ablate accessory pathways or interrupt
re-entry circuits.
Drugs in arrhythmia
Table 10 describes the Vaughan-Williams classification of antiarrhythmic drugs,
and Figure 21 outlines the drugs used in the treatment of arrhythmia.
142
)Vm(
laitnetop
enarbmeM
--- Страница 154 ---
Arrhythmia
Further reading
Fuster V, Ryden LE, Asinger RW et al. ACC/AHA/ESC Guidelines for the Management of
Patients With Atrial Fibrillation: Executive Summary. A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the European
Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines and Policy Conferences
(Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation)
Developed in collaboration with the North American Society of Pacing and
Electrophysiology. Eur Heart J2001;22:1852–923.
Guidelines for Clinical Intracardiac Electrophysiological and Catheter Ablation Procedures.
A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
practice guidelines. (Committee on Clinical Intracardiac Electrophysiologic and Catheter
Ablation Procedures). Developed in collaboration with the North American Society of Pacing
and Electrophysiology. Circulation1995;92:673–91.
Silverman ME. From rebellious palpitations to the discovery of auricular fibrillation:
contributions of Mackenzie, Lewis and Einthoven. Am J Cardiol1994;73:384–9.
Wolff L, Parkinson J, White PD. Bundle-branch block with short P-R interval in healthy
young people prone to paroxysmal tachyardia. Am Heart J1930;5:685.
143
--- Страница 155 ---
144
--- Страница 156 ---
Chapter 9
Valve disease
Disease of the heart valves remains an important cause of morbidity and mortality
across the world. While advances in echocardiography and the widespread
availability of antibiotics have changed the prevalence, management, and especially
the diagnosis of valve disease for specialists, very little has changed for generalists,
who hear heart murmurs lessfrequently. Even though echo diagnosis is not readily
available to generalists, they nevertheless feel pressured to identify murmurs and to
report them, with their associated signs, in the referral letter. Similarly, for many
examiners, the appeal of obscure murmurs for clinical short-case exams remains
too great to resist, despite its mostly historical relevance. Yet, there are few greater
pleasures in clinical medicine than having your stethoscopic diagnostic brilliance
confirmed by an echo report. Furthermore, healthcare economics has prompted a
renewed interest in the power of the stethoscope for diagnosing and even
quantifying valve disease.
The asymptomatic murmur
Opinions differ as to the management of a murmur that has been picked up
incidentally. By far the most common is the mid systolic 2/6 murmur (grade II –
see Table 1). For children and young adults with an asymptomatic mid systolic
murmur, a negative history and a negative physical exam are sufficient to exclude
sinister pathology in most cases.
Grade Murmur
I Just audible in a quiet room
II Quiet
III Loud, no thrill
IV Loud, with thrill
V Very loud with thrill
VI Audible without a stethoscope
Table 1.Grading of murmurs.
145
--- Страница 157 ---
Chapter 9
In the elderly, it is important to differentiate between the common and benign
aortic sclerosis and the less common and less benign aortic stenosis (AS). As
such, close attention should be paid to the cardiac exam. In particular, AS is
indicated by:
• murmur radiation
• the presence of a thrill
• a soft second heart sound
In addition, an electrocardiogram should be carried out to screen for left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH), ischemia, and atrial size or conduction abnormalities. If none
of the above is present and the patient remains asymptomatic, the most likely
diagnosis is aortic sclerosis and no echo is required.
Referral is warranted when a murmur in an asymptomatic patient is:
• systolic and grade III or above
• late systolic
• mid systolic and accompanied by clinical signs suggestive of AS
• diastolic
• continuous
Aortic stenosis
Causes
Congenital aortic stenosis
Congenital AS is usually due to a bicuspid valve. A bicuspid valve in itself does not
give rise to significant hemodynamic abnormality, but it has a tendency to calcify
and a predisposition to infective endocarditis (see Table 2).
Rheumatic aortic stenosis
Rheumatic AS results from cusp fusion and calcification many years following
rheumatic fever.
Senile aortic stenosis
Senile, or degenerative, AS results from calcium deposition on the aortic surface of the
valve. This is becoming an increasingly important disability problem in the elderly.
Physical signs
• The carotid pulse is slow rising with reduced amplitude.
• The venous pressure is usually normal until late in the disease.
146
--- Страница 158 ---
Valve disease
Aortic stenosis Aortic regurgitation
Signs Slow rising pulse Collapsing pulse
↓Pulse pressure ↑Pulse pressure
Radiates
to carotids EDM
S1 EC ESM A2 P2 S1 S2 S1 S2
(soft)
Can be palpable thrill Displaced, volume-loaded apex
Causes Bicuspid valve Rheumatic valve disease
Rheumatic valve disease Infective endocarditis
Age-related calcification Marfan’s syndrome
Endocarditis Inflammatory disease
(ankylosing spondylitis, SLE,
rheumatoid arthritis)
Reiter’s syndrome
Relapsing polychondritis
Dissecting aneurysm
Syphilitic aortitis
Table 2.Clinical signs in aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation. EC: ejection click; EDM:
early diastolic murmur; ESM: ejection systolic murmur; SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus.
• The apex beat is sustained and can be doubled due to an additional
atrial component.
• On auscultation, the second heart sound is single when the valve is calcified
due to a lack of aortic component. The classic ejection systolic murmur,
which can radiate to one or both carotids, is usually heard best over the aortic
area. A soft, early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation (AR) often coexists.
Investigation and management
Echo is the diagnostic tool of choice for valve disease – in particular, Doppler
measurement of valve gradients can quantify lesions. Significant hemodynamic
changes do not occur until the aortic valve area has been reduced to a quarter of
its normal size (the normal orifice is 3–4 cm2). AS is classed as:
• mild if the area is >1.5 cm2
• moderate if the area is 1–1.5 cm2
• severe if the area is <1 cm2
147
--- Страница 159 ---
Chapter 9
THE INVENTION OF THE STETHOSCOPE
“In the summer of 1816, Laennec was called to a young lady who presented the
general symptoms of disease of the heart; the application of the hand to the chest
and percussion afforded very little assistance, and immediate auscultation was
interdicted by the sex and embonpointa of the patient. The recollection of the
well-known fact, that the tap of a pin at one end of a beam could be heard
distinctly at the opposite end, induced him at the moment, to avail himself of this
acoustic phenomenon. He took a quire of paper, rolled it tightly together, applied
one extremity over the region of the heart, and putting the ear to the other, was
surprised to find that he could distinguish the pulsation of the heart in a more
distinct manner than he could before do with the naked ear. Having hit upon the
principle he extended its application to the investigation of the various sounds
produced in the chest by the respiration, the voice, and the accidental presence
of fluids in the lung, pleural sac, and pericardium.”
Mediate Auscultation, 1816. (Quoted in The Lancet1998;352:997.)
aCorpulence, physically bulky.
Severe stenosis causes a transvalvular pressure gradient of >50 mm Hg in the
presence of normal transvalvular flow (ie, normal LV function). However,
abnormally low pressure gradients are found in conditions of LV dysfunction, so
the gradient alone is not a clear guide.
The natural history of AS is one of slow progression. Studies suggest that some
patients exhibit a decrease in valve area of 0.1–0.3 cm2/year, although no
progression is discernible in many patients. However, regardless of the individual
variability, symptoms of angina, syncope, or heart failure generally develop after a
latent period. At this point, the outlook changes dramatically. After the onset of
symptoms, the average survival is less than 3 years. Thus, development of
symptoms is the critical point in the natural history of AS and thereafter the
benefits of surgery outweigh the risk. Consequently, asymptomatic AS patients
should be monitored closely. Although there is no clear consensus, most
cardiologists follow-up mild AS annually (together with 5-yearly echos); moderate
AS every 6 months (together with 2-yearly echos); and severe AS more frequently
(together with annual echos). If a patient with AS presents with a change in
symptoms, their next appointment at the cardiology clinic should be expedited.
If a patient with severe AS is undergoing open chest bypass grafting for coexisting
coronary artery disease (CAD), the opportunity should be taken to carry out aortic
valve replacement(AVR) – regardless of whether or not AS symptoms are evident.
The merit of carrying out a concomitant AVR is less clear for those with mild or
moderate AS.
148
--- Страница 160 ---
Valve disease
Cardiac catheterization is only indicated in AS for two reasons: (1) to perform
coronary angiography before AVR in patients with risk factors for CAD; (2) to
assess the severity of AS in symptomatic patients when AVR is planned or when
noninvasive tests are inconclusive (catheterization allows accurate quantification of
the orifice because it can account for transvalvular flow).
Contrary to popular belief, exercise testing is not contraindicated for mild to
moderate AS patients and can give useful information with respect to exercise
capacity, heart rate recovery, and exercise-induced rise in blood pressure.
Balloon valvotomy
Percutaneous balloon aortic valvotomy (stretching a stenotic valve by balloon
inflation) has an important role to play in the treatment of young adults with AS,
but a very limited role in older patients. This is because the postoperative valve
area is rarely >1 cm2 and because complications are frequent (10%) and serious.
This procedure can act as a “bridge” to reduce the requirement for surgery
(with its inherent risk) in adult patients with refractory pulmonary edema or
cardiogenic shock.
Aortic valve replacement in the elderly
Due to the limitations of medical therapy and balloon valvotomy, AVR should be
considered for all elderly patients with symptomatic AS. However, the decision as
to whether to carry out AVR is rarely straightforward and must take into account
the risks as viewed by both the surgeon and the patient. Comorbidity in the form
of LVH or CAD greatly increases the risk associated with surgery. In addition,
specific valve problems, such as heavy calcification and narrow LV outflow tract or
annulus, make the procedure more complex. The decision is highly individual.
Aortic regurgitation
AR is associated with classic clinical signs (see Table 2):
• waterhammer (collapsing) pulse – detected by comparing the
character of the radial pulse at the level of the heart with its character
on elevation of the arm (use several fingers). Elevation accentuates the
steep rise-and-fall character of this pulse, which seems to slap faster
and harder against the fingers
• Corrigan’s sign – visible arterial pulsation in the neck
• de Musset’s sign – nodding of the head in time with the heartbeat
• Duroziez’s sign – caused by retrograde diastolic flow in the femoral artery.
Place the stethoscope on the femoral pulse and occlude the artery distally.
The turbulent flow will be picked up as a “to-and-fro” murmur
149
--- Страница 161 ---
Chapter 9
• Quincke’s sign – capillary pulsation in the nail beds that is visible
on applying gentle pressure to induce a degree of whitening
• Traube’s sign – a “pistol-shot” sound heard over the femoral pulse
• Müller’s sign – pulsation of the uvula
An early diastolic murmur is heard at the left lower sternal edge when the patient
is sitting forward and holding his or her breath in expiration. There could also be
a coexistent aortic systolic flow murmur, caused by the large stroke volume (rather
than reflecting organic AS). There may be a mid diastolic murmur at the apex
(Austin Flint murmur) caused by the regurgitant aortic jet vibrating the anterior
mitral valve (MV) leaflet.
Acute aortic regurgitation
Acute AR is one hallmark of aortic dissection and is a medical emergency in its own
right. A large regurgitant volume is suddenly imposed on an LV of normal size that
has not had time to accommodate to the volume overload. The result is a reduction
in stroke volume, compensatory tachycardia, pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic
shock. Characteristic clinical findings are absent and an echo is essential to document
the severity of the lesion. This is done by assessing the speed of equilibration of aortic
and LV pressures in diastole. Useful echo measures are short regurgitant wave half
time, short mitral deceleration time, and premature closure of the MV.
Mortality is high in acute severe AR and early surgical intervention is essential.
Nitroprusside can be helpful in reducing preload and afterload, possibly in
combination with dobutamine or dopamine. Intra-aortic balloon pumping is
absolutely contraindicated (it increases aortic diastolic pressure and worsens the
regurgitation), while b-blockers, often used in the management of dissection,
should be used with caution in associated acute severe AR as they dampen the
compensatory tachycardia.
Chronic aortic regurgitation
An early diastolic murmur is always justification for referral to a cardiologist for
assessment and echo.
Causes
• Rheumatic involvement of the aortic valve, resulting in thickening
of the cusps and fusion of the commissures – the valve neither
opens nor closes completely.
• Dilatation of the aortic root resulting from aneurysm of the
ascending aorta – this is commonly seen in Marfan’s syndrome.
150
--- Страница 162 ---
Valve disease
• Dilatation of the aortic annulus can also result from connective tissue
disease, such as ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Reiter’s
syndrome, relapsing polychondritis, or systemic lupus erythematosus.
• Dissecting aneurysm involving the aortic root.
• Syphilitic aortitis causing aortic aneurysm and dilatation of the valve
ring that may involve the coronary ostia.
Table 2outlines the causes of aortic regurgitation.
Natural history and therapeutic options
Chronic AR represents a condition of combined volume and pressure overload on
the LV. The ejection fraction (EF) – the percentage of the end diastolic volume
ejected during systole – is maintained by compensatory LVH and the majority of
patients remain in this compensated phase for decades. However, in time, the EF
drops. Although initially this is fully reversible, soon, due to progressive dilatation
and remodeling, full recovery with AVR is out of reach. A large number of studies
have identified LV systolic dysfunction and end systolic dimension as the key
determinants of survival in patients undergoing AVR for AR. Thus, in contrast to
AS, the critical point when the benefit of AVR outweighs the risk is determined not
by symptoms, but by echo-determined LV function. More specifically, AVR is
indicated in:
• patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV
symptoms (see Chapter 7, Heart failure) and preserved LV systolic
function – defined as normal EF (350% at rest)
• patients with NYHA class II symptoms and preserved LV systolic
function at rest, but with progressive LV dilatation, declining rest EF,
or declining effort tolerance (the trend is more important than the
absolute level)
• patients with angina on walking or climbing stairs rapidly
• asymptomatic or symptomatic patients with mild to moderate
LV dysfunction at rest (EF 25%–49%)
• patients undergoing open chest surgery for another reason
(eg, bypass grafting)
Exercise testing can be useful in AR if the patient is sedentary or has equivocal
symptoms. It assesses functional capacity and the hemodynamic effects of exercise.
Radionuclide ventriculography should be used if the echo window is poor. Cardiac
catheterization is only required in patients at risk of CAD prior to AVR or where
other tests are equivocal.
151
--- Страница 163 ---
Chapter 9
Asymptomatic patients with no LV dysfunction should be encouraged to
participate in all forms of normal daily activity, including exercise (although lifting
weights should be avoided).
Vasodilator therapy can, in theory, retard the natural history of chronic AR by
reducing the regurgitant volume. However, very few studies have actually examined
the effect of this treatment on the long-term outcome. Indications for vasodilator
therapy (generally using long-acting nifedipine) are:
• long-term therapy in patients with severe regurgitation who have
symptoms and/or LV dysfunction, when surgery is not recommended
• long-term therapy in asymptomatic patients with severe regurgitation
who have LV dilatation, but normal systolic function
• long-term therapy in asymptomatic patients with hypertension
and any degree of regurgitation
• long-term therapy in patients with persistent LV systolic dysfunction
after AVR (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor)
• short-term therapy to improve the hemodynamic profile of patients
with severe heart failure symptoms and severe LV dysfunction before
proceeding with AVR
Asymptomatic patients with mild AR and normal LV systolic function should be
seen by a cardiologist annually and undergo echo every 2–3 years. Asymptomatic
patients with normal systolic function, but severe AR and significant LV dilatation (end
diastolic diameter >6 cm), require more frequent evaluation. These patients should
be seen by a cardiologist every 6 months and undergo echo every 6–12months.
Mitral stenosis
The MV apparatus consists of three components: two leaflets, the fibrous annulus,
and the chordae tendineae, which connect the leaflets to the papillary muscles (see
Figure 1). The anterior leaflet is larger than the posterior leaflet (see Figure 2). The
normal area of the MV orifice is 4–5 cm2. Symptoms of mitral stenosis (MS) develop
when the orifice is <2.5 cm2and a critical stenosis occurs when it is approximately
1 cm2 (seeFigure 3). The signs and causes of MS are outlined in Table 3.
Causes
Rheumatic heart disease is the most common cause of MS, although it pre-dates the
symptoms by at least 10 years. Other acquired causes are rare – eg, annular calcification,
endocarditis, or granulomatous infiltration in association with eosinophilia.
152
--- Страница 164 ---
Valve disease
Anterior leaflet
Anteromedial commissure
Anterior annulus
Posterior leaflet
Posterolateral
(three lobes)
commissure
Posterior Chordae tendineae
annulus
Lateral papillary Medial papillary
muscle muscle
Figure 1.The structure of the mitral valve apparatus.
Figure 2.A calcified mitral valve posterior leaflet in diastole.
Signs
Symptoms of MS generally occur during exertion, infection, stress, or with the
onset of atrial fibrillation (AF) with a rapid ventricular response. This is because a
left atrial (LA) pressure that is normal at rest rises with an increase in transmitral
flow or a decrease in the diastolic filling time.
The most common manifestation is breathlessness, but a reduction in exercise
tolerance or symptoms of right-sided congestion can also occur. The typical
153
--- Страница 165 ---
Chapter 9
Figure 3.Mitral stenosis with left atrial dilatation. This figure shows a
thickened mital valve arrow. The spontaneous contrast is a good illustration
of the thrombogenicity of the blood in the left atrium. This is believed to be
the first step before the formation of thrombi, which then result in emboli.
Mitral stenosis Mitral regurgitation
Signs
Opening snap Presystolic
accentuation
Pansystolic
(cid:2) murmur
(cid:2)
S1 S2 Murmur S1 S2 S1 S2 S3
(lou(cid:2)d) (cid:2)(loud) (soft)
Tapping apex beat
Malar flush Parasternal heave
P mitrale on ECG Apex beat is sustained and
Parasternal heave prominent and there may be
a systolic thrill at the apex
Causes Rheumatic valve disease Rheumatic valve disease
Age-related calcification Mitral valve prolapse
Endocarditis Degenerative valve disease
Granulomatous infiltration Infective endocarditis
Ischemia
Table 3.Common murmurs in mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation with their
associated signs and causes.
physical signs are described in Table 4. Figure 4 demonstrates MS in echo,
electrocardiography pressure tracing, and a chest x-ray.
Natural history
The disease takes a slow course with progressive acceleration later in life. In
developed countries, the lag period from the time of rheumatic fever to the onset
of symptoms is 20–40 years, and there is another 10 years before these symptoms
154
--- Страница 166 ---
Valve disease
Typical physical signs of mitral stenosis
Irregular pulse of atrial fibrillation
Rise in jugular venous pressure (with coexistent tricuspid regurgitation)
Parasternal heave with right ventricular hypertrophy
Loud first heart sound
Tapping apex beat (manifestation of a loud first heart sound)
Opening snap, which disappears as the leaflets become rigid
Classic late diastolic murmur with presystolic accentuation (the longer
the murmur, the more severe the lesion)
Table 4.The typical physical signs of mitral stenosis.
(a) (b)
Left atrium
(c)
Left ventricle
Figure 4.Mitral stenosis demonstrated by (a) echocardiography (showing thickened
leaflets that no longer open), (b) electrocardiography pressure tracing in the left atrium
versus left ventricle demonstrating the gradient between the two cavities (and therefore
mitral stenosis), and (c) chest x-ray.
become disabling. The 10-year survival rate is high for asymptomatic patients
(>80%), but low for those with symptoms (0%–15%). Asymptomatic patients
with mild MS (MV area >1.5 cm2) require no further evaluation and do not need
to be followed up more than annually.
Percutaneous and surgical therapy
Decisions on therapy are made by joint consideration of symptoms and MV
morphology (including hemodynamics and pulmonary artery pressure).
Therapeutic options include MV repair (open/closed commissurotomy),
MV replacement, and percutaneous valvotomy.
155
--- Страница 167 ---
Chapter 9
Current recommendations for surgical therapy
Percutaneous NYHA class II–IV symptoms, MVA <1.5 cm2, and no
valvotomy LA thrombus or MR
Asymptomatic patients, MVA ≤1.5 cm2, pulmonary
hypertension (>50 mm Hg), and no LA thrombus or MR
NYHA class III–IV symptoms, MVA ≤1.5 cm2, and at high
surgical risk
MV repair NYHA class III–IV symptoms, MVA ≤1.5 cm2, and one
of the following:
•percutaneous valvotomy is not available
•LA thrombus is resistant to anticoagulation
•an intraoperative decision on repair versus replacement
will be made
MV replacement NYHA class I–II symptoms, MVA ≤1 cm2, and severe
pulmonary hypertension (>60 mm Hg)
NYHA class III–IV symptoms, MVA ≤1.5 cm2, and not
suitable for repair or valvotomy (calcification, fibrosis,
subvalvular fusion)
Table 5.Current recommendations for surgical therapy. LA: left atrium; MR: mitral
regurgitation; MV: mitral valve; MVA: mitral valve area; NYHA:New York Heart Association.
Both repair and percutaneous valvotomy acutely result in a doubling of the valve
area and a 60% reduction in transmitral gradient. However, open commissurotomy
and percutaneous valvotomy produce better long-term hemodynamic results.
The current recommendations for percutaneous and surgical therapy are outlined
in Table 5.
Medical therapy
Prophylaxis against rheumatic fever and endocarditis should be considered for all
patients with MS. Agents with negative chronotropic properties, such as b-blockers
or calcium-channel blockers, may benefit those in sinus rhythm with symptoms
relating to exertional tachycardia.
Atrial fibrillation
AF develops in 40% of patients with symptomatic MS and should be treated
according to standard protocols (see Chapter 8, Arrhythmia). The value of
anticoagulation therapy for those with AF and those with a prior embolic event
with or without AF is clear. However, there is no evidence that oral anticoagulation
is beneficial in those with MS who have neither AF nor a prior embolic event. The
frequency of embolic events does not seem to be related to the severity of MS, the
size of the LA, or the presence of symptoms. There is some controversy over
156
--- Страница 168 ---
Valve disease
(a) (b)
Figure 5.(a) Transesophageal echocardiography showing a tear in the papillary muscle (the
most common cause of acute mitral regurgitation).(b) The same scene with a color jet from
the left ventricle into the left atrium, demonstrating “blood flow” in the wrong direction.
whether percutaneous mitral valvotomy should be performed in patients with new-
onset AF and moderate or severe MS who are otherwise asymptomatic.
Mitral regurgitation
Acute mitral regurgitation
In acute severe mitral regurgitation (MR), the hemodynamic changes are not
tolerated and the result is generally acute decompensation. Without time for
compensatory LV and LA dilatation, the increase in ventricular preload leads to a
decreased stroke volume and pulmonary congestion. However, examination
findings may not be typical:
• there may be no hyperdynamic apex beat
• the systolic murmur may be short
• there may be a fourth heart sound
The most common cause of acute MR is papillary muscle rupture secondary to
myocardial infarction (MI) (seeFigure 5). In this situation, the principal differential
diagnosis is ventricular septal defect and an echo is required to differentiate
between the two. Ventricular septal defect is more likely with:
• right-sided radiation of murmur
• raised jugular venous pressure (JVP)
• anterior MI (inferior MI is more likely to cause acute MR)
The goal of medical therapy in acute severe MR is to diminish regurgitation,
increase stroke volume, and reduce pulmonary congestion. As such, nitroprusside
alone or in combination with dobutamine (if blood pressure is low) can be
157
--- Страница 169 ---
Chapter 9
Figure 6.Echocardiogram showing a vegetation on the mitral valve (arrow).
Clinical signs of chronic mitral regurgitation
Prominent and sustained apex beat
Systolic thrill at the apex
Left parasternal heave – resulting from left atrium expansion, rather than right
ventricular hypertrophy
Soft first heart sound
Pansystolic murmur at the apex that radiates into the axilla
Third heart sound that is high pitched due to high early diastolic filling velocities
Table 6.The clinical signs of chronic mitral regurgitation.
effective. Intra-aortic balloon pumping can also help to achieve these goals. In
many cases, emergency surgery is warranted. If so, prior transesophageal echo
helps to characterize the anatomy and severity of the lesion. Cardiac catheterization
should be performed if the patient is at high risk for CAD.
Chronic mitral regurgitation
Causes
• Degenerative MV disease is common in the elderly. The valve leaflets
are thickened, redundant, increased in area, and they prolapse into
the LA in systole. The chordae may become elongated, thinned, and
tortuous – predisposing to rupture.
158
--- Страница 170 ---
Valve disease
Optimal sarcomere
length
Actin Actin
Frank–Starling
curve
Normal resting
length
Sarcomere
length
LV
dysfunction
Ventricular end-diastolic volume
Figure 7.Frank–Starling curve showing left ventricular (LV) dysfunction.
• Infective endocarditis is a major cause of chronic MR. Vegetations
developing on the cusp vary from small nodules along the line of
apposition to large friable masses of up to 10 mm or more (see
Figure 6). “Jet” lesions on the anterior cusp of the MV can also
occur in association with aortic valve endocarditis.
• Ischemia.
Clinical signs
The clinical signs of chronic MR are outlined in Table 6. With severe MR, the
regurgitant murmur is usually short and stops at the same time as aortic valve
closure. Occasionally, the murmur can hardly be heard due to early equalization of
atrioventricular pressures. The signs and causes of MR are outlined in Table 3.
Natural history
In chronic MR, the increased preload and decreased afterload of the LV (caused by
ejection of some of the stroke volume into the LA) are compensated for by LV and
LA dilatation, and the total stroke volume is increased (the EF is also maintained).
This compensated phase of chronic MR may last for years. Eventually, however,
the volume overload causes sufficient dilatation to push the LV onto
the downward portion of the Frank–Starling curve and dysfunction results
(see Figure 7). Importantly, the loading conditions mean that this dysfunction
might not be reflected in an abnormal EF (the EF in a patient with MR and normal
LV function is >60%).
Asymptomatic patients with mild MR and no evidence of LV dilatation or
dysfunction can be followed on a yearly basis and undergo echo less frequently
than that. Asymptomatic patients with moderate MR should have an echo
annually. Asymptomatic patients with severe MR should be followed up every
159
emulov
ekortS
--- Страница 171 ---
Chapter 9
6–12 months and undergo echo to detect silent LV dysfunction. Exercise testing is
useful to document changes in exercise tolerance.
The timing of surgery is determined by the EF, LV end systolic dimension (LVESD),
the presence of AF, and symptoms. It is indicated for those with:
• class II–IV symptoms, EF >60%, LVESD <45 mm
• EF 30%–60%, LVESD 45–55 mm (regardless of symptoms)
• asymptomatic patients with AF and normal EF
• symptomatic patients with normal EF and pulmonary
hypertension (>50 mm Hg)
• asymptomatic patients with EF 50%–60% and LVESD <45 mm,
or EF >60% and LVESD 45–55 mm
• patients with EF <30% and/or LVESD >55 mm in whom the chordae
tendineae are likely to be intact (ie, no previous MI in that territory)
The operation of choice is MV repair. In many patients, however, replacement
of the valve together with removal of part or all of the MV apparatus (chordae)
is required. The repair procedure leads to better postoperative LV function
and survival.
There is no generally accepted medical therapy for chronic MR. Although
vasodilators might seem a sensible choice, in fact, in compensated chronic MR the
afterload is decreased (since the LV has two routes of ejection); as such, drugs that
reduce the afterload further are unlikely to be beneficial.
Chronic MR can also occur due to a primary ischemic cause, relating either to
LV dysfunction or to chordal ischemia – revascularization or stenting can eliminate
the episodes.
Functional mitral regurgitation
The normal function of the MV depends on the cusps, ring, and subvalvular
apparatus, including papillary muscle fibers and the circumferential muscle layer
supporting the mitral ring. Each of these components plays a significant role in
maintaining the competence of the valve. With papillary muscle dysfunction due
to ischemia or other causes of ventricular disease, cusp closure is not complete,
leading to some degree of regurgitation. This can even occur, for example, in
athletic hypertrophy. This is usually mild, but can be significant in rare cases. In
such conditions, the heart rate is usually fast and the duration of MR long enough
to compromise filling time and hence cardiac output. Although functional in
origin, it can be hemodynamically significant.
160
--- Страница 172 ---
Valve disease
ALFRED DE MUSSET
“La bouche garde le silence,
Pour écouter parler le coeur.”a
Alfred de Musset (1810–1857), La Nuit de Mai
The French romantic poet and playwright, Alfred de Musset (1810–1857), was
famous for both his creative brain and his pathological heart. His most
inspiring work was prompted by the ending of a love affair he had with George
Sand (a French romantic writer who later had a 10-year relationship with
Chopin). During a visit to Venice in 1834, both Sand and he became very
unwell. Such was the quality of care and attention lavished on them by their
physician that Sand fell in love with this man and de Musset returned to
France alone (where he penned some of his best work). He spent the last
2 years of his life housebound, his heart broken by the combined effects of lost
love, aortic regurgitation, and alcohol-related cardiomyopathy. The nodding of
his head in time with his heartbeat, the classic eponymous sign of aortic
regurgitation, was described by his brother in a biography. When told of it,
deMusset apparently placed his thumb and forefinger on his neck and his head
stopped bobbing.
aThe mouth keeps silent to hear the heart speak.
Mitral valve prolapse
MV prolapse (MVP) is the single most common valvular abnormality. It affects
2%–6% of the population and is defined as a backward movement of one or
both leaflets of the MV (usually the anterior) into the LA during (ventricular)
systole. In most cases it is associated with trivial MR. However, as a result of
its prevalence, it is also the most common single cause of significant MR.
Although MVP does not alter life expectancy, all of the above complications of MR
can occur. Sudden death, often reported as an association with MVP, is rare
(<2% on long-term follow-up).
Classic findings on auscultation are a mid systolic click followed by a late systolic
murmur. The click is thought to be caused by a tensing of the MV apparatus as the
leaflets prolapse into the LA. The murmur is usually high pitched and loudest at
the apex. Certain maneuvers can help to secure the diagnosis: standing reduces
end diastolic volume (EDV), bringing the click–murmur nearer to the first heart
sound; squatting increases EDV (and afterload), moving the click–murmur nearer
to the second heart sound.
Patients with these findings should be referred for echo assessment. Interestingly, there
is no absolute consensus on criteria for diagnosing MVP on two-dimensional echo. The
161
--- Страница 173 ---
Chapter 9
diagnosis should never be made on one view alone (especially if that is the 4-chamber
view). Serial echos are not necessary unless there is a change in the clinical picture.
Management involves reassurance and prophylaxis for endocarditis. Patients who
suffer from palpitations should have Holter/event monitoring to make a firm diagnosis.
Aspirin is recommended for patients with documented focal neurological events who
are in sinus rhythm and have no atrial thrombus. Recurrent transient ischemic attacks
or stroke in MVP patients demand long-term warfarin therapy. Ultimately, MV repair
may be required, and the indications are as for MR (described above).
Tricuspid valve disease
In comparison with the left side, the right side of the heart is a low-pressure system.
Consequently, disorders such as endocarditis, in which high-pressure jets help to
“seed” the infective vegetations, occur less frequently. The notable exception is in
intravenous drug abusers, where right-sided endocarditis is more common.
Perhaps the most common cause of tricuspid valve incompetence, however, is
elevated right ventricular (RV) pressure, secondary to pulmonary hypertension,
MS, pulmonary stenosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, or RV failure. In addition,
rheumatic heart disease can affect the tricuspid valve and tends to produce a
combination of tricuspid stenosis and regurgitation – the overriding symptoms are
those of regurgitation. Ebstein’s anomaly is a congenital disorder affecting the
tricuspid valve (see Chapter 14, Adult congenital heart disease).
Clinical signs
Physical examination is key to the diagnosis of tricuspid regurgitation. Typical
signs are:
• gross fluid retention
• significant peripheral edema
• ascites that may result in nausea
• raised JVP with a prominent systolic wave and sharp Y descent
• parasternal heave and loud P2, suggesting pulmonary hypertension
as a cause
• an enlarged, tender, pulsatile liver and, occasionally, mild jaundice
• a pansystolic murmur at the left lower sternal edge that is increased
by inspiration
Management
Severe tricuspid regurgitation resulting from any cause is associated with a poor
long-term outcome due to RV dysfunction and systemic venous congestion. The
timing of surgery and the most suitable operation remain controversial, although
chordal reconstruction and annuloplasty have become established in recent years.
162
--- Страница 174 ---
Valve disease
Annuloplasty involves the use of a prosthetic ring to support the endogenous
dilated annulus. Valve replacement is also possible.
Medical management treats fluid retention and AF. Standard protocols are used,
although high doses and combination diuretics are often required.
Pulmonary valve disease
Pulmonary regurgitation is caused by pulmonary hypertension and annular
dilatation resulting from various causes of left-sided heart disease (as well as primary
pulmonary hypertension). An early diastolic murmur (Graham Steell murmur) is
heard over the pulmonary area and should be distinguished from that of AR.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is only required if the cause is rheumatic. Most pulmonary
valve disease does not need treatment. However, valve replacement can be carried
out in cases of intractable right heart failure.
Valve disease in pregnancy
In pregnancy, there is a 50% increase in circulating blood volume. The cardiac output
peaks between the second and third trimesters, predominantly due to an increase in
stroke volume, although the heart rate also increases by up to 20%. Total peripheral
resistance falls disproportionately, reducing the diastolic blood pressure and
widening the pulse pressure. Occasionally, in the supine position the inferior vena
cava can be compressed by a gravid uterus, leading to an abrupt decrease in venous
return. This can result in light headedness, but quickly resolves on changing position.
The increased blood volume and cardiac output can accentuate stenotic murmurs,
while the lowered peripheral resistance can actually reduce regurgitant murmurs. In
general, echo demonstrates a degree of “physiological” chamber enlargement that,
in a significant minority of women, may be associated with functional MR.
In some conditions (eg, cyanotic heart disease, Eisenmenger syndrome, and severe
pulmonary hypertension), the changes resulting from pregnancy greatly increase
risk and most cardiologists would counsel against pregnancy. The following are also
associated with increased risk, either to the mother or fetus:
• severe AS
• MR/AR with class III–IV symptoms
• MS with class II–IV symptoms
• pulmonary pressures >75% of systemic
• EF <40%
• mechanical prosthetic valves requiring anticoagulation
• AR in Marfan’s syndrome
163
--- Страница 175 ---
Chapter 9
Although risk is increased, many patients with valvular abnormalities can be
managed through pregnancy with conservative medical measures aimed at
optimizing intravascular volume.
Mitral stenosis
Penicillin prophylaxis should be continued in pregnant women with MS. The cautious
use of diuretics and b-blockers in those with mild to moderate disease can prevent
tachycardia and optimize diastolic filling. For women with severe disease, a
percutaneous balloon valvotomy prior to conception should be considered. Those
who develop class III–IV symptoms during pregnancy should also undergo valvotomy.
This can be achieved with very limited fluoroscopy or appropriate shielding.
Mitral regurgitation
The usual cause of MR is MVP; this rarely requires treatment.
Aortic stenosis
The most likely cause of AS in a woman of childbearing age is congenital bicuspid
disease. Mild to moderate obstruction can be managed conservatively throughout
pregnancy, whereas those with severe disease (eg, gradient >50 mm Hg, LV
function likely to be normal) should be advised to delay conception until treatment
is obtained.
Aortic regurgitation
AR can usually be managed medically with a combination of diuretics and
vasodilator therapy. As with MR, surgery should be contemplated during
pregnancy for the control of class III–IV symptoms.
Anticoagulation in pregnancy
Warfarin crosses the placenta and has been associated with an increased incidence
of spontaneous abortion, fetal deformity, prematurity, and stillbirth. The incidence
is probably around 5%–10%. In contrast, heparin does not cross the placenta and
is generally safer. However, it is associated with a higher degree of thromboembolic
complications. The evidence base for decision making is not good, and the
decision should be made in partnership with the patient after explaining the risks
involved. Most change from warfarin to heparin at week 36 in anticipation of labor.
164
--- Страница 176 ---
Valve disease
Further reading
Guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart disease. Executive summary:
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines (Committee on Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease).
Circulation1998;98:1949–84.
Phoon CK. Estimation of pressure gradients by auscultations: an innovative and accurate
physical examination technique. Am Heart J2001;141:500–6.
Shry EA, Smithers MA, Mascette AM. Auscultation versus echocardiography in a healthy
population with precordial murmur. Am J Cardiol2001;87:1428–30.
165
--- Страница 177 ---
166
--- Страница 178 ---
Chapter 10
Infective endocarditis
Background
Endocarditis was first described by William Osler in 1885. It is an inflammatory
process that affects the endocardium and may have an infective or noninfective
(eg, systemic lupus erythematosus) origin. It is uncommon in the western world
(22cases per million), but more prevalent in developing countries.
Diagnosis
Symptoms
Endocarditis is rarely an obvious diagnosis for a generalist. It may present with a
wide variety of clinical signs, some subtle; the diagnosis may be difficult or the
signs misleading, and there is a wide differential diagnosis to consider. However,
there is a wealth of clinical signs to look for.
Constitutional symptoms
Endocarditis should be considered in patients with vague or generalized
constitutional symptoms such as fever, rigors, night sweats, anorexia, weight loss,
or arthralgia.
Cardiac signs
The presence of a new murmur is very significant, as is a change in the nature
of an existing murmur (a regurgitant murmur may disappear on worsening).
Myocardial involvement or valvular dysfunction may both contribute to left
ventricular failure.
Skin lesions
Endocarditis is indicated by:
• Osler’s nodes – tender lesions found on finger pulps
and thenar/hypothenar eminences (see Figure 1)
• Janeway lesions – transient, nontender macular papules
on palms or soles
• splinter hemorrhages
• petechiae (embolic or vasculitic)
• clubbing – in long-standing disease
167
--- Страница 179 ---
Chapter 10
Figure 1.Osler’s nodes on a finger and foot.
Eyes
Roth spots (boat-shaped hemorrhages with pale centers, in retina) and conjunctival
splinter hemorrhages may be found.
Splenomegaly
Splenic infarction may occur as a result of emboli. In this case, splenic palpation
may be painful and tender, and a rub may be heard.
Neurological
An acute confusional state is common in patients with infective endocarditis (IE).
Cerebral emboli, which usually affect the middle cerebral artery, result in
hemiplegia and sensory dysfunction. Mycotic aneurysms also affect the middle
cerebral artery, where rupture may cause a subarachnoid hematoma. Mycotic
aneurysms can occur several years after endocarditis has been treated.
Renal
Infarction causes loin pain and hematuria. Immune complex deposition may
result in glomerulonephritis.
OSLER’S NODES
William Osler, 1909, on the eponymous Osler’s nodes: “One of the most
interesting features of [endocarditis] and one to which very little attention has
been paid is the occurrence of ephemeral spots of a painful nodular erythema,
chiefly in the skin of the hands and feet, the nodosités cutanées éphémerès of the
French… The commonest situation is near the tip of the finger, which may be
slightly swollen.”
168
--- Страница 180 ---
Infective endocarditis
If any of these signs occur together with a fever, the patient should be urgently
referred to a cardiologist for blood cultures and echocardiography – the level of risk
will determine whether this is transesophageal echo (TEE) or transthoracic echo.
Blind treatment with antibiotics should not be undertaken since it will delay
diagnosis and identification of the causal organism. Antibiotics should not be
initiated before three sets of blood cultures have been taken.
Formal diagnosis
The Duke diagnostic classification for IE divides signs and symptoms into major
and minor criteria (see Table 1). IE is diagnosed if patients have:
• two major criteria; or
• one major and three minor criteria; or
• five minor criteria
These criteria are associated with a 99% specificity for diagnosis in follow-up
studies. It has been proposed that the minor criteria be extended to include
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP), splenomegaly,
microscopic hematuria, and newly diagnosed clubbing. This adjustment increases
diagnostic sensitivity by 10%.
Intravenous drug abuse
Right-sided endocarditis is common in intravenous drug abusers (IVDAs) because
of nonsterile injection into the venous system. The presentation tends to differ
from that of classic IE, in that these patients are more likely to develop pneumonia
or septic pulmonary emboli than the characteristic signs mentioned above (which
result from left-sided embolization). In addition, predominant right-sided failure is
more common (look for significantly raised jugular venous pressure and gross
peripheral edema). The tricuspid valve is most commonly affected (50%), whereas
involvement of the mitral and aortic valves is less common (20% each). The
involvement of multiple valves is common. Pulmonary valve endocarditis is rare.
Etiology
IE has a large number of causative organisms.
Streptococci
These account for 50%–80% of IE cases. Streptococcus viridans (eg, S. anguis,
S. milleri, S. mutans, S. mitior) make up the normal bacterial flora of the pharynx
and upper respiratory tract. Tonsillectomy, dental extraction, and dental cleaning
can result in bacteremia and lead to infection.
169
--- Страница 181 ---
Chapter 10
The Duke criteria for the diagnosis of IE
Major criteria
1. Positive blood culture for IE
A. Typical micro-organism consistent with IE from two separate blood cultures,
as noted below:
• viridans streptococci, Streptococcus bovisa, or HACEK group; or
• community-acquired Staphylococcus aureusor enterococci, in the absence
of a primary focus; or
B. Micro-organisms consistent with IE from persistently positive blood cultures
defined as:
• two or more positive cultures of blood samples drawn >12 hours apart
• all of three or a majority of four or more separate cultures of blood (with first
and last sample drawn ≥1 hour apart)
2. Evidence of endocardial involvement
A. Positive echocardiogram for IE defined as:
• oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting structures, in the path
of regurgitant jets, or on implanted material in the absence of an alternative
anatomic explanation; or
• abscess; or
• new partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve; or
B. New valvular regurgitation (worsening or changing of pre-existing murmur
not sufficient)
Minor criteria
1. Predisposition: predisposing heart condition or intravenous drug use
2. Fever: temperature ≥38.0ºC
3. Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts,
mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages,
and Janeway lesions
4. Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler’s nodes, Roth spots,
and rheumatoid factor
5. Microbiological evidence: positive blood culture, but does not meet a major
criterion as noted abovebor serological evidence of active infection with an
organism consistent with IE
6. Echocardiography findings: consistent with IE, but do not meet a major criterion
as noted above
Table 1.Definitions of terms used in the Duke criteria for the diagnosis of infective
endocarditis (IE). HACEK: Haemophilus parainfluenza, Haemophilus aphrophilus, Actinobacillus
(Haemophilus) actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella species,and Kingella
species. aIncludes nutritionally variant strains (Abiotrophiaspecies); bexcludes single positive
cultures for coagulase-negative staphylococci and organisms that do not cause endocarditis.
Reproduced with permission from Excerpta Medica (Durack DT, Lukes AS, Bright DK.
New criteria for diagnosis of infective endocarditis: utilization of specific echocardiographic
findings. Duke Endocarditis Service. Am J Med1994;96:200–9). ©1994 Excerpta Medica.
170
--- Страница 182 ---
Infective endocarditis
WILLIAM OSLER, 1919:
“Observe, record, tabulate, communicate. Use your five senses.”
Sir William Osler (1849–1919) is one of the most admired and honored physicians
in the history of medicine. He exerted a truly global influence through professorships
(McGill, Johns Hopkins, and Oxford), his textbook The Principles and Practice of
Medicine, and other clinical and philosophical writings. This influence is apparent
not least in the sheer number of conditions that bear his name: Osler–Weber–Rendu
syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia), Osler’s nodes, Osler–Libman
disease (subacute bacterial endocarditis), and Osler–Libman–Sacks syndrome
(systemic lupus erythematosus with endocarditis) are simply a few. But it was
perhaps his overwhelming humanism and his dedication to patient-centered
learning that marked him out as truly great (he once ran after an alcoholic beggar
to whom he’d just given coins and added his own overcoat to the donation, saying:
“You may drink yourself to death, and undoubtedly will, but I cannot let you freeze
to death”). The combination of profound caring, a prolific output of creative writing
and ideas, and a lifelong penchant for elaborate practical jokes has made him one
of the most memorable physicians of the 20th century.
Staphylococci
Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis account for 20%–30% of
subacute cases of IE and 50% of the acute forms. The presence of central venous
catheters (feeding lines or temporary pacing lines) increases susceptibility. Acute
S. aureus infection of previously normal valves has a mortality rate of 3%. This is
the most common situation in IVDAs. Coagulase-negative staphylococci cause
30%–50% of prosthetic valve endocarditis.
Enterococci
Enterococci account for 5%–15% of IE cases. Enterococcal organisms, which
include Streptococcus faecalis,have low infectivity.
HACEK organisms
The HACEK group of organisms – Haemophilus parainfluenza, Haemophilus
aphrophilus, Actinobacillus (Haemophilus) actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium
hominis, the Eikenella species, and the Kingella species – also commonly cause IE
and can be difficult to diagnose. Their identification may require samples to be
taken in special media.
IE is also caused by other, less common organisms. Candida, Aspergillus,
Histoplasma, and Brucellainfections are rare, but are found, in particular, in IVDAs,
alcoholics, and patients with prosthetic heart valves. Coxiella burnetii(the causative
agent of Q fever) can also cause a subacute infection.
171
--- Страница 183 ---
Chapter 10
Figure 2.Mitral valve vegetation.
Pathogenesis
Endocarditis infection occurs along the edges of the heart valves. The lesions,
called vegetations, are masses composed of fibrin, platelets, and infecting
organisms, held together by agglutinating antibodies produced by the bacteria.
As inflammation continues, ulceration may result in erosion or perforation of the
valve cusps, leading to valvular incompetence, damage to the conduction pathway
(if in the septal area), or rupture of a sinus of Valsalva (if in the aortic area).
Although endocarditis can affect native and prosthetic valves, infection seldom
affects a previously normal heart – the majority (60%) of IE patients have a
predisposing cardiac condition. Vegetations usually affect the left side of the heart,
with the most common underlying lesions being mitral valve prolapse and
degenerative mitral and aortic regurgitation (see Figure 2).
Rheumatic disease is a risk factor for the development of endocarditis. Other
predisposing cardiac lesions include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with associated
mitral reflux, subaortic stenosis, and ventricular aneurysm. There are also
congenital lesions that predispose adults to endocarditis: these include ventricular
septal defect (VSD), bicuspid aortic valve, and coarctation of the aorta.
Vegetations occur when a high-pressure jet enters a low-pressure cavity through a
narrow orifice. This explains why endocarditis complicates a small VSD, but is not
associated with a large VSD, mitral stenosis, or an atrial septal defect. In the
presence of a VSD, vegetations can be found on the right ventricular side of the
VSD, on the tricuspid valve, or where the jet impinges on the right ventricular
wall. Vegetations found in coarctation usually occur distal to the obstruction.
172
--- Страница 184 ---
Infective endocarditis
Finally, in children, cyanotic heart disease is still the most common cause of
endocarditis, and the risk does not diminish after surgical repair as prostheses
carry their own risk.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis
A special subset of endocarditis is that affecting prosthetic valves. This is
traditionally divided into early onset (within 60 days of surgery) or late onset.
Early onset usually results from perioperative valve contamination with
staphylococci, whereas the etiology of late prosthetic valve endocarditis resembles
native valve infection, usually due to streptococci.
Refer with confidence
As mentioned above, IE can be a difficult diagnosis to make, and the key for the
generalist is to always be aware of it as a differential. Fever and arthralgia are very
common complaints, but if there is any suggestion that they are not due to a
simple viral illness (eg, by the presence of a particularly high temperature or other
clinical signs [see above]) then the patient should be referred for blood cultures
and an echo. If fever and a changing murmur coexist then urgent referral is
warranted, although, even here, it can be useful to take blood cultures and a bottle
for serology (for the diagnosis of culture-negative endocarditis) yourself.
Specialist management
Investigations
Blood cultures
Blood cultures are the primary investigation in the diagnosis of IE and yield the
causative micro-organism in up to 95% of cases. A failure to do so can be due to
prior antibiotic treatment, the presence of fastidious organisms (eg, belonging to
the HACEK group), or unusual organisms such as Candida, Chlamydia, or Brucella.
Most importantly, blood has to be drawn before antibiotic treatment is initiated, at
three different time points over a minimum of 1 hour. At each time point, blood
should be taken from a different site of the patient’s body – but not from central
lines – and each sample is placed into a pair of blood culture bottles that cultivate
aerobic and anaerobic bacteria separately.
If immediate antibiotic treatment is warranted, this can be initiated right after
completion of blood culturing, once microbiology tests have identified a specific
organism and the antibiotic therapy has been modified accordingly. Antibiotic
therapy can have an enormous impact on the patient’s prognosis; therefore, all
efforts have to be made to collect and culture specimens as carefully as possible.
This ensures the correct identification of the causative micro-organisms, and
ultimately the correct use of antibiotics.
173
--- Страница 185 ---
Chapter 10
Figure 3.Transesophageal echo for 1 mm lesions.
Echocardiography
This is the key investigation as it can assess underlying cardiac function as well as
demonstrate vegetations. Chamber size, pre-existing rheumatic disease, and valve
apparatus can be examined and the degree of valve incompetence assessed.
Transthoracic two-dimensional echo can detect vegetations above 2 mm in
diameter, whereas TEE has greater precision in detection of lesions (1–1.5 mm),
with a sensitivity and specificity of over 90% (see Figure 3). Detection of prosthetic
endocarditis is more sensitive with TEE.
Other investigations
Other investigations include the following:
• blood count – normochromic normocytic anemia is usual, while
neutrophil leucocytosis is common
• ESR – this may be raised
• renal and liver function test – levels of creatinine may be raised; levels of
liver enzymes may be raised in a hepatocellular (nonobstructive) pattern
• CRP – increases acutely in bacterial infection
• urine microscopy – microscopic hematuria is common in early disease
• culture – culture any skin lesion, drip site, or other focus of infection
• electrocardiography (ECG) – ECG regularly (daily if aortic or septal root
abscess is suspected)
Treatment
Antibiotics
If, following blood cultures, the diagnosis is secure, high-dose IV antibiotics
should be started immediately. It is becoming increasingly common to insert a
174
--- Страница 186 ---
Infective endocarditis
tunneled central line to facilitate several weeks of IV treatment without the need
for repeated cannulation – with the pain and attendant risk of secondary infection
that this incurs.
Native valve endocarditis with a subacute onset is most likely to be caused by
S. viridans or an enterococcal species. Treatment involves IV penicillin (2.4 g,
4 hourly) for up to 4 weeks, with gentamicin (1 mg/kg, 12 hourly) for 2 weeks.
If the onset is acute, staphylococci need to be covered and treatment should
include IV cloxacillin (flucloxacillin) (3g, 6hourly, in place of penicillin) with oral
fusidic acid.
If the patient is allergic to penicillin, other possibilities are vancomycin (1g twice
daily) or teicoplanin (400 mg twice daily for 3 days, then 400 mg daily).
Plasma levels of gentamicin and vancomycin need to be monitored every
48–72hours.
Empirical treatment of endocarditis affecting prosthetic valves should cover
streptococci, enterococci, staphylococci (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus),
and Gram-negative organisms. Vancomycin or teicoplanin with gentamicin have
good synergistic cover. In drug abusers, treatment for endocarditis should include
cover for S. aureusand Gram-negative bacilli (eg, cloxacillin and pipercillin).
In the treatment of rarer causes of endocarditis, Coxiella may require doxycycline
with cotrimoxazole or rifampicin. Candidaand Aspergillusmay respond to medical
therapy (5-fluorouracil and amphotericin B, respectively), but, generally, all
three of these infections respond poorly to medical therapy alone and require
surgical intervention.
In the treatment of IE, from any source, fever may still be present 2 weeks after
starting the appropriate treatment, even with drug-sensitive organisms. This could
be due to the presence of an underlying large vegetation or abscess. If fever
persists, the sensitivity of the infecting organism should be checked and drug
levels monitored. Repeat echo should be performed to exclude increasing
vegetation size or abscess formation. If, despite these measures, the fever remains,
the possibility of antibiotic resistance should be considered and a further
synergistic antimicrobial treatment may be required. A second site for fever should
always be excluded.
Surgical intervention
Surgical intervention may be required in patients with persistent fever that is
resistant to medical therapy. Surgery is also indicated in the following conditions:
175
--- Страница 187 ---
Chapter 10
• valve obstruction
• prosthetic-valve endocarditis caused by S.aureusor resistant organisms
• aortic or mitral regurgitation not responding to medical therapy
• paravalvular abscess
• development of an aneurysm of a sinus of Valsalva
• fungal endocarditis
• multiple embolic episodes
• progressive heart failure secondary to severe valve destruction
• oscillating vegetation of >1 cm
Surgery may involve not only valve replacement, but also aortic root replacement
for aortic root abscesses. After the relevant surgical procedure, a full course of
antibiotic eradication therapy should be administered.
Prognosis
With effective treatment, patients with IE have a 70% survival rate. The prognosis
is worse if there is no identifiable organism or if there is a resistant organism.
Fungal infections are associated with increased mortality, as is prosthetic valve
endocarditis. Overall death rates are 20% for native valve endocarditis, 30% for
staphylococcal infections, and 20%–30% for late prosthetic valve infection, despite
full medical and surgical treatment. The most common cause of death is intractable
heart failure.
Prophylaxis
All patients at risk for IE should receive antibiotic cover for invasive procedures (see
Tables 2 and 3, overleaf). Spontaneous bacteremia is also common as a result of
poor dental hygiene, and susceptible patients need to be made aware of this.
176
--- Страница 188 ---
Infective endocarditis
Situation Agenta Regimen
Standard general Amoxicillin Adults: 2g; children: 50mg/kg
prophylaxis orally 1 hour before procedure
Unable to take Ampicillin Adults: 2g IM or IV; children:
oral medication 50mg/kg IM or IV within
30minutes before procedure
Allergic to Clindamycin Adults: 600mg; children: 20mg/kg
penicillin orally 1hour beforeprocedure
Cephalexinb, Adults: 2g; children; 50mg/kg
cefadroxilb orally 1hour before procedure
Azithromycin, Adults: 500mg; children: 15mg/kg
clarithromycin orally 1hour before procedure
Allergic to penicillin Clindamycin Adults: 600mg; children:
and unable to take 20mg/kg IV within
oral medications 30minutes before procedure
Cefazolinb Adults: 1g; children: 25mg/kg
IM or IV within 30minutes
before procedure
Table 2.Prophylactic regimens for dental, oral, respiratory tract, or esophageal
procedures. IM: intramuscularly; IV: intravenously. aTotal children’s dose should not
exceed adult dose; bcephalosporins should not be used in individuals with immediate-type
hypersensitivity reaction (urticaria, angioedema, or anaphylaxis) to penicillins. Reproduced
with permission from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins (Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Wilson W
et al. Prevention of Bacterial Endocarditis: Recommendations by the American Heart
Association. Circulation1997;96:358–66).
177
--- Страница 189 ---
Chapter 10
Situation Agentsa Regimenb
High-risk Ampicillin + Adults: ampicillin 2g IM or IV plus
patients gentamicin gentamicin 1.5mg/kg (not to exceed
120mg) within 30minutes of starting
the procedure; 6hours later, ampicillin
1g IM/IV or amoxicillin 1g orally
Children: ampicillin 50mg/kg
IM or IV (not to exceed 2g) +
gentamicin 1.5mg/kg within
30minutes of starting the procedure;
6hours later, ampicillin 25mg/kg
IM/IV or amoxicillin 25mg/kg orally
High-risk patients Vancomycin + Adults: vancomycin 1g IV over
allergic to ampicillin/ gentamicin 1–2hours + gentamicin 1.5mg/kg
amoxicillin IV/IM (not to exceed 120mg);
complete injection/infusion within
30minutes of starting the procedure
Children: vancomycin 20mg/kg IV over
1–2hours + gentamicin 1.5mg/kg
IV/IM; complete injection/infusion within
30minutes of starting the procedure
Moderate-risk Amoxicillin or Adults: amoxicillin 2g orally 1hour
patients ampicillin before procedure, or ampicillin
2g IM/IV within 30minutes of
starting the procedure
Children: amoxicillin 50mg/kg orally
1hour before procedure, or ampicillin
50mg/kg IM/IV within 30minutes
of starting the procedure
Moderate-risk Vancomycin Adults: vancomycin 1g IV over
patients allergic to 1–2hours; complete infusion within
ampicillin/amoxicillin 30minutes of starting the procedure
Children: vancomycin 20mg/kg IV over
1–2hours; complete infusion within
30minutes of starting the procedure
Table 3.Prophylactic regimens for genitourinary/gastrointestinal (excluding esophageal)
procedures. IM: intramuscularly; IV: intravenously. aTotal children’s dose should not
exceed adult dose; bno second dose of vancomycin or gentamicin is recommended.
Reproduced with permission from Lippincott Williams & Wilkins (Dajani AS, Taubert KA,
Wilson W et al. Prevention of Bacterial Endocarditis: Recommendations by the American
Heart Association. Circulation1997;96:358–66).
178
--- Страница 190 ---
Infective endocarditis
Further reading
Bayer AS, Bolger AF, Taubert KA et al. Diagnosis and management of IE and its
complications. AHA Scientific Statement. Circulation 1998;98:2936–48.
Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Wilson W et al. Prevention of Bacterial Endocarditis:
Recommendations by the American Heart Association. Circulation1997;96:358–66.
Golden RL. William Osler at 150. JAMA1999;282:2252–8.
179
--- Страница 191 ---
180
--- Страница 192 ---
Chapter 11
Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
With a prevalence of only 0.2%, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is rarely
encountered by generalists. Most cases are identified by screening family members
of known sufferers – 50% of cases are familial.
Background
HCM is a primary, usually familial disorder of cardiac muscle with complex
pathophysiology, significant heterogeneity in its expression, and a diverse clinical
course. It is defined as cardiac hypertrophy that cannot be explained by pressure or
volume overload, and is probably the most common genetically transmitted heart
disease. The clinical course is highly variable; some patients remain asymptomatic
throughout life, whereas others die prematurely – either suddenly or from
progressive heart failure. HCM is characterized by mutations in the DNA encoding
cardiac contractile or energy-related proteins, predominantly the b-myosin heavy
chain, a-tropomyosin, and cardiac troponin T (see Figure1 and Table 1).
Despite dramatic improvements in the knowledge and understanding of HCM,
challenges and controversies still exist regarding its diagnosis, etiology, natural
history, and management. For example, many HCM patients do not, in fact, have
left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). The shifting understanding of this complex
disease can make terminology difficult. However, “hypertrophic cardiomyopathy”
is the preferred expression for this condition. This nomenclature avoids the term
“idiopathic subaortic stenosis” or inclusion of the word “obstructive”, which imply
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (present in only 25% of cases). It also
excludes secondary causes of LVH.
The classic features of HCM are asymmetrical LVH with a normal or small left
ventricular cavity. However, wall thickness varies considerably. The majority of clearly
identified patients have an unmistakably abnormal left ventricular mass.
This averages at a septal thickness of 20–22 mm, but can be up to 60 mm (see
Figure2). This leaves a significant minority of patients in whom there will be diagnostic
ambiguity with respect to cardiac morphology. In fact, the hallmark of the disease is
181
--- Страница 193 ---
Chapter 11
α-Tropomyosin Troponin T Troponin I Troponin C Myo psi rn o- tb ei in nding
Myosin
light
chain
Myosin Myosin
heavy head
chain
Figure 1.Contractile proteins in the cardiac sarcomere. The top chain represents actin;
the bottom chain represents myosin. Contraction occurs when calcium binds the troponin
complex, allowing myosin to bind to actin with the production of force: “Myosin rows
the actin sea”. Reproduced with permission from Massachusetts Medical Society (Spirito P,
Seidman CE, McKenna WJ et al. The management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
N Engl J Med1997;336:775–85).
Protein Percentage
Beta-myosin heavy chain 35
Myosin-binding protein C 15
Troponin T 15
Alpha-tropomyosin 1
Myosin light chain 1
Table 1.Mutations known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
myocardial fiber disarray. Clearly, this cannot be a useful diagnostic marker during life,
and increasing attention is being given to molecular genetic diagnostic tools.
Regardless of the electrocardiogram (ECG) presentation, the prognosis for HCM
patients can be unpredictable. Some with severe hypertrophy remain
asymptomatic, while others with apparently less severe hypertrophy develop
arrhythmias, increased ventricular stiffness, heart failure, or sudden death. Indeed,
there can be considerable variation in phenotype within families (see Figure 2).
182
--- Страница 194 ---
Cardiomyopathy
This much variation
can exist in one family
N HCM
LVmass
Figure 2.Left ventricular (LV) mass in a normal (N) individual
and in a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
Clinical examination
HCM has classic clinical signs, most of which relate to outflow obstruction
(hence their presence is not required for diagnosis). They are as follows:
• jerky pulse
• prominent “a” wave in jugular venous pressure (JVP)
• double apex beat
• S3
• S4
• late ejection quality systolic murmur over the aortic area that
is increased by standing and decreased by squatting
• a pansystolic murmur at the apex (indicating mitral regurgitation [MR])
The ECG may show LVH and T-wave inversion. With progressive left ventricular
disease, left bundle branch block (LBBB) may appear.
Echo is the test of choice. Left ventricular wall thickness is measured from M-mode
traces (see Chapter 4, Understanding the echocardiogram). Left ventricular outflow
tract velocities can be measured and pressure drop estimated by continuous-wave
Doppler. Diastolic dysfunction is common in HCM.
Specialist management
Medical
The main aim of medical treatment is to limit the effects of outflow tract
obstruction. Beta-blockers and/or rate limiting calcium-channel blockers, such as
verapamil, can improve diastolic filling (by reducing heart rate), reduce exercise-
related outflow obstruction, and reduce the possibility of arrhythmia. Amiodarone
183
--- Страница 195 ---
Chapter 11
and sotalol can prevent supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmia, but should
only be used in patients with a previous episode.
Dual-chamber pacing
Patients who remain symptomatic despite drug therapy can have a DDD
pacemaker inserted (see Chapter 8, Arrhythmia), set to a short atrioventricular (AV)
delay. The effect of this is to pace the right ventricle each beat and induce an LBBB-
type activation of the left ventricle, which reduces outflow obstruction by
desynchronizing contraction of the septum and the posterior wall. Patients can be
treadmill-tested to confirm that the AV delay is sufficiently short to maintain right
ventricle capture at higher heart rates.
Nonsurgical septal reduction
A recent technique involving cardiac catheterization has been proposed as an
alternative for outflow tract pressure gradient reduction and symptom
improvement. This technique came to light following observations, in the early
eighties, that upon balloon inflation in the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary
artery there is a reduction of outflow tract velocities and gradients. The procedure
involves balloon inflation in the proximal segment of the first septal perforator of
the LAD and assessment of outflow tract gradient. If the gradient drops
significantly, a small quantity of alcohol (3–5 mL) is injected down the cannulated
artery, distal to the balloon, in an attempt to induce a localized proximal septal
infarction. The velocities are then measured.
The stress-induced outflow tract gradient after dobutamine injection is also
assessed, both before and after the procedure. If the results are not satisfactory,
these steps are repeated while cannulating the second perforator of the LAD.
Procedural success is always associated with significant myocardial enzyme rise and
a fall in outflow tract velocities, development of significant conduction disturbance,
and septal incoordinate relaxation. Mid- and long-term follow-up after nonsurgical
septal reduction have proved promising in terms of a decrease in symptoms and
maintained low outflow tract gradient.
Surgery
Until the last decade, the major nonmedical option for treating HCM with
persistent symptoms was surgical myotomy/myectomy. In this procedure, which is
also called the “Morrow procedure”, a small portion of the proximal septal
myocardium is resected to widen the outflow tract. Mortality from this technique
is now <2% and there is a subjective symptomatic improvement in 70% of
patients. However, complications are common and for the majority of patients it
results in complete LBBB or they require a permanent pacemaker for complete
heart block. As a consequence, surgeons have explored other possibilities, such as
184
--- Страница 196 ---
Cardiomyopathy
History
Examination
Family history of premature death
Auscultate the heart, both lying and
Family history of heart disease at age
standing, with particular attention
<50 years
to outflow murmurs
Personal history of murmur,
Assess radiofemoral delay to exclude
hypertension, excessive fatigability,
coarctation
or syncope
Recognize the stigmata
Personal history of excessive or
of Marfan’s syndrome
progressive shortness of breath
Measure systemic blood pressure
or pain on exertion
Table 2.Key points in history and examination for preparticipation screening in athletes.
mitral valve replacement and anterior leaflet extension, to reduce MR, reduce
outflow obstruction, and stiffen the anterior leaflet.
Preparticipation screening for sport
HCM is occasionally discovered during preparticipation screening for sport, and
should be considered when a young athlete presents with voltage criteria LVH.
In this situation, the question as to when to refer for echocardiography arises.The
most common voltage criterion is that of Sokolow–Lyon (SV1 + RV5 >3.5 mV)
(see Chapter 3, Conquering the ECG). Although the vast majority of young athletes
in this category will have a normal heart, most cardiologists would recommend that
any young, normotensive patient who meets these voltage criteria should be
referred for an echo.
The ECG and echo are the key diagnostic tools. However, the overall prevalence
of relevant conditions (0.2%) makes these cost-ineffective. Approximately 200
screenings are required to detect one abnormality, while 200,000 are needed to
prevent one death. Thus, it is important to maximize the information available
from history and examination (see Table 2).
There is consensus that history and physical examination are the only cost-effective
screening tools for sudden cardiac death in athletes. However, these are very poor
at identifying the primary causes of sudden death:
• HCM in its nonobstructive form (~35%) produces no murmur
(see Figure 3)
• coronary artery abnormalities (~20%) are not detectable
by simple clinical examination
185
--- Страница 197 ---
Chapter 11
Figure 3.Hypertrophic nonobstructive cardiomyopathy.
Note the grossly hypertrophied interventricular septum.
ECG patterns are distinctly abnormal (LVH, inverted T waves, deep Q waves, axis
deviation, or LBBB) in about 15% of athletes, and mildly abnormal (borderline
LVH, flat T wave, long PR interval, right bundle branch block) in another 25%.
Early repolarization may account for another 15%. Bradycardia <60 bpm is
found in more than a third. Abnormalities are most common in males younger
than 20 years who are involved in endurance sports such as cycling, rowing,
and cross-country skiing. In one series, 5% of over 1,000 consecutively examined
athletes had structural abnormalities such as HCM or dilated cardiomyopathy
(DCM).
Dilated cardiomyopathy
DCM is a primary disease of the cardiac muscle and can be defined as left or right
ventricular dilatation and failure in the absence of coronary artery disease,
hypertension, valve disease, or congenital heart abnormality. Patients usually
present with shortness of breath and signs of congestion in an identical way to
heart failure of any other cause. There are many causes of DCM:
• alcohol
• familial
• myocarditis
• postradiation or chemotherapy (eg, adriamycin/doxorubicin)
• hemochromatosis
• thyrotoxicosis
• thiamine deficiency
186
--- Страница 198 ---
Cardiomyopathy
Prognosis
The prognosis is variable according to the degree of ventricular damage. It is
generally agreed that patients with resistant high filling pressures do badly. Those
with biventricular dilatation and impairment of function do even worse.
Investigations
The ECG shows no specific signs: it may be normal or show conduction
disturbances. Chest x-ray shows increased cardiothoracic ratio and pulmonary
vascular congestion.
Echo is the test of choice and will show a grossly dilated ventricle with thin walls
and globally impaired systolic function. Disease progression results in functional
MR and the development of left atrial dilatation. In rare cases, the disease solely
affects the right heart. Cardiac catheterization is used to exclude coronary artery
disease and measure intracardiac pressures.
Management
Management is as described for chronic heart failure (see Chapter 7, Heart failure).
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a disease of the heart muscle that results in
myocardial stiffness and an incompliant ventricle. Patients present with
predominantly right-sided failure (gross peripheral edema, raised JVP,
hepatomegaly) and a normal-sized heart. Classic clinical signs are rapid x and y
descent of the JVP, and loud S3 and S4.
The most common causes are:
• hemochromatosis
• sarcoidosis
• amyloidosis
• carcinoid syndrome
• glycogen storage disease
• scleroderma
• endomyocardial fibrosis and eosinophilic heart disease
Investigations
The ECG can be a useful tool, as subendocardial fibrosis can result in conduction
disturbances. In addition, amyloid heart disease presents with low voltages.
However, echo enables diagnosis. Classic findings include:
187
--- Страница 199 ---
Chapter 11
• absence of ventricular dilatation or hypertrophy
(common but not invariable)
• left ventricle and right ventricle systolic function are often normal
• there may be biatrial dilatation
• the myocardium may be speckled or echogenic
• the Doppler ventricular in-flow pattern exhibits a high E:A ratio
(see Chapter 4, Understanding the echocardiogram)
The key differential diagnosis is constrictive pericarditis. This is an important
distinction to make as constrictive pericarditis can be treated surgically.
Management
There is no specific medical treatment for restrictive cardiomyopathy. The main aim
is to control symptoms of cardiac failure. In patients with high filling pressures,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in particular have shown a significant
beneficial effect in unloading the left ventricle and improving symptoms. Atrial
fibrillation should be controlled with digoxin and a prophylactic anticoagulant is
usually recommended.
Eosinophilic cardiomyopathy can be treated with steroids, cytotoxic drugs, and
prophylactic anticoagulants for thromboembolism. Endomyocardial fibrosis that is
not controlled by medical therapy may warrant surgical intervention for
subendocardial decortication. Carcinoid syndrome may require tricuspid valve
replacement (see Chapter 9, Valve disease).
Further reading
Maron BJ, Moller JH, Seidman C et al. Impact of laboratory molecular diagnosis on
contemporary diagnostic criteria for genetically transmitted cardiovascular disease:
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long-QT syndrome, and Marfan Syndrome. Circulation
1998;98:1460–71.
Pelliccia A, Maron BJ, Culasso F et al. Clinical significance of abnormal electrocardiographic
patterns in trained athletes. Circulation2000;102:278–84.
Prior SG, Aliot E, Blomstrom-Lundqvist C et al. Task force on sudden cardiac death of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J2001;22:1374–450.
188
--- Страница 200 ---
Chapter 12
Aneurysm and dissection
of the aorta
Aortic aneurysm
Aneurysms of the thoracic aorta (see Figure 1) are not as common as those
affecting the abdominal portion, but carry a higher risk of rupture. Both share the
same primary cause: atherosclerosis. In the past, ascending aortic aneurysms were
typically caused by syphilis, but nowadays hypertension or Marfan’s syndrome are
more likely to be responsible. Symptoms result from the acute painful tear felt as
central chest pain, which radiates to the back, and from the compression of
surrounding structures:
• dysphagia (esophagus)
• dyspnea (bronchi; pericardial effusion)
• upper thorax/neck swelling (superior vena cava)
Standard radiology and echocardiography can be useful in monitoring the
progression of aneurysms. Computed tomography (CT) is the gold standard and
should be carried out annually in patients with known disease that does not yet
require surgery or percutaneous placement of an aortic prosthesis/stents. However,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is increasingly being used.
Management
The central feature of management is rigorous control of blood pressure (BP). Therapy
should include a b-blocker and be aimed at keeping systolic pressure <120mm Hg.
Marfan’s syndrome
Described by Bernard Marfan in 1896, this autosomal dominant single-gene
disorder results from a mutation of the fibrillin gene on chromosome 15. The key
clinical features are:
• arachnodactyly (long spindly fingers)
• high-arched palate
• pectus excavatum
189
--- Страница 201 ---
Chapter 12
Aortic
arch
Aneurysm
Ascending
aorta
Descending
aorta Figure 1.A typical
aneurysm of the
thoracic aorta at surgery.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN
Abraham Lincoln was both tall (6ft 4in) and thin (160–180 lb). He had long
arms and legs, and large, narrow hands and feet. Contemporary descriptions
of his appearance indicate that he was stoop-shouldered, loose-jointed, and
walked with a shuffling gait. In addition, he wore eyeglasses to correct a visual
problem. It is not surprising then that many have concluded that he suffered
from Marfan’s syndrome. Certainly, he shared a great-great-grandfather with
a man who had a confirmed diagnosis of Marfan’s. In fact, this observation,
reported by Dr Harold Schwartz in 1959, was the beginning of a mystery that
has taxed historians and doctors ever since. However, Lincoln showed few other
signs of Marfan’s. He had visual problems, but examination of his eyeglasses
reveals he was farsighted and not nearsighted – a classic symptom of Marfan’s.
Also, a cast of his hands has shown that they were muscular and powerful, and
not the slender hands of someone with Marfan’s syndrome. Although the fun of
the mystery is often in the debate and not in the answer, this is one theory that
could be tested: a limited amount of bone fragments and hair from Lincoln was
retained by the attending physician at the time of his assassination. Molecular
testing using these samples could end the debate in an instant.
190
--- Страница 202 ---
Aneurysm and dissection of the aorta
Arterial lumen
Endothelial cells
Intima
Internal
elastic lamina
Media (smooth
muscle cells)
External
elastic lamina
Adventitia (fibroblasts,
elastin, collagen)
Figure 2. The adventitia, media, and intima of the aortic wall.
• an armspan greater than height
• upward lens dislocation
• aortic root dilatation and aortic incompetence
• mitral valve prolapse
The key differential diagnosis is homocystinuria, a recessively inherited defect in
amino-acid metabolism, which has similar skeletal features. Homocystinuria is
associated with low IQ and typically causes downward dislocation of the lens.
However, it does not affect the heart.
Marfan’s patients should undergo annual echo screening of the aortic root and
prophylactic replacement should be considered when the diameter reaches 55 mm
(a normal diameter is 40 mm). Beta-blockade can retard the rate of dilatation, but
patients who do not have the replacement die in the fourth or fifth decade from
aortic dissection or cardiac failure secondary to aortic regurgitation.
Sinus of Valsalva
A congenital aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalva is a rare cause of arteriovenous
shunt. It is formed because of a weak connection between the aortic valve and the
aortic fibrous ring. This enlarges during childhood and usually ruptures in
adulthood into the right ventricle, creating a volume shunt from the left to the right
side of the heart. The diagnosis is confirmed by aortography. Without surgical
repair, biventricular failure results.
Aortic dissection
Dissection, which is usually caused by atherosclerosis, is the development of a tear
in the aortic intima that creates a false lumen through the aortic media for a variable
distance (see Figures 2 and3).
191
--- Страница 203 ---
Chapter 12
Type A Type B
Figure 3. Classification of dissection.
Figure 4.Computed tomography scans showing dissection of the aorta.
I
S
T
AA AA F
P
T
T
I F
F
Figure 5.Magnetic resonance images showing separation of the dissected membrane.
AA: ascending aorta; F: false lumen; I: intimal flap; P: pulmonary artery; S: subclavian
artery; T: true lumen.
192
--- Страница 204 ---
Aneurysm and dissection of the aorta
b T
T
I F
F
I
LA
I
AV
T
F T
F
Figure 6.Transesophageal echocardiograms showing separation of the dissecting
membrane. AV: aortic valve; F: false lumen; I: intimal flap; LA: left atrium; T: true lumen.
Dissection is classified according to whether it includes the ascending aorta
(typeA) or not (type B) (see Figure 3). Type A dissection is a surgical emergency
because of the high risk of proximal extension, rupture, and sudden death. If a
type A dissection is confirmed by CT or MRI, the patient should be operated on
immediately. The highly specialized repair operation can involve replacement
of the aortic root with a vascular graft, reimplantation of the coronary arteries,
and resuspension of the aortic valve. In some cases it may be necesssary to
replace the valve.
In contrast, type B dissection is managed medically by aggressive antihypertensive
treatment. In the acute situation, the systolic BP should be lowered to <110mmHg
using intravenous (IV) b-blockade (eg, labetalol). Beta-blockade, as well as reducing
the BP, reduces the BP’s rate of rise and for this reason it is preferred to sodium
nitroprusside as the first-line IV agent. If b-blockers are contraindicated then
rate-limiting calcium-channel blockers, such as diltiazem or verapamil, can be used.
193
--- Страница 205 ---
Chapter 12
(a) (b)
Figure 7.(a,b) Chest x-rays. A dissected aorta can be seen in (b) (arrow).
Figure 8.Chest x-ray showing extreme dissection of the aorta (arrows).
Dissection typically presents with a severe tearing central chest pain that radiates to
the back. A patient with such a history should be referred urgently to a specialist
center since the ascending aorta might be involved. Immediate investigations include:
• CT or MRI scan (see Figures 4 and5, previous page)
• transesophageal echo to assess possible aortic regurgitation
(see Figure 6,previous page)
• transthoracic echo for pericardial effusion
• preoperatively, coronary artery disease must be ruled out
by coronary angiography
194
--- Страница 206 ---
Aneurysm and dissection of the aorta
A physical examination can prove useful diagnostically, but should not delay the
above emergency investigations. It should include:
• measurement of the BP in both arms (unequal
BP is a sign, though not a reliable sign)
• documentation of all peripheral pulses (lack of peripheral pulses may
be the only sign if the dissection spares the ascending aorta)
• close attention to heart sounds (aortic regurgitation and
tamponade are possible with proximal extension)
• neurologic examination (hemiplegia or paraplegia can result from
occlusion of the carotid arteries and anterior spinal arteries, respectively)
Other potentially useful investigations are:
• assessment of renal function, including urine microscopy and
catheterization for accurate measurement of renal output
• a chest x-ray, which often shows a distended aorta or generalized
widening of the mediastinum (see Figures 7 and8)
Further reading
Erbel R, Alfonso F, Boileau C et al.; Task Force on Aortic Dissection, European Society of
Cardiology. Diagnosis and management of aortic dissection. Eur Heart J2001;22:1642–81.
Khan IA, Nair CK. Clinical, diagnostic, and management perspectives of aortic dissection.
Chest2002;122:311–28.
195
--- Страница 207 ---
196
--- Страница 208 ---
Chapter 13
Pericardial disease
Pericarditis
A diagnosis of pericarditis (inflammation of the pericardium), though rare, should
always be considered as a differential for ischemic heart pain. The key
differentiating features are that the pain in pericarditis is altered by posture and can
be exacerbated by deep inspiration. Classically, the patient will be found sitting
forward and taking shallow breaths.
Pathophysiology
The pericardium has two layers: visceral and parietal. The visceral layer is closely
apposed to the heart, whilst the fibrous parietal layer provides a more rigid outer
shell to the pericardial cavity (see Figure 1). The normal volume of pericardial fluid
is in the region of 50 mL.
Pericardial cavity
Fibrous
layer
Myocardium
Parietal
pericardium
Endocardium
Visceral
pericardium
Figure 1. The layers of pericardium. The visceral pericardium is a tissue paper-like layer,
while the parietal pericardium is more rigid.
197
--- Страница 209 ---
Chapter 13
Causes of pericarditis
Postmyocardial infarction/postcardiac surgery
Viral (Coxsackie B, influenza)
Metastatic malignancy
Uremia
Tuberculous
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Table 1.Causes of pericarditis.
The causes of pericarditis are outlined in Table 1. Viral pericarditis is the most
common type, but in many cases either the diagnosis is never made or the viral
infection is never identified. Another common presentation is characteristic pain
3–14 days postmyocardial infarction (MI) or postcardiac surgery, which tends to
be self-limiting. Relapsing episodes are referred to as Dressler’s syndrome or
postcardiotomy syndrome, and are thought to represent an autoimmune process.
Investigations
Examination
Auscultation may reveal a pericardial rub, which is sufficient, but not necessary,
to make the diagnosis. It can easily be distinguished from a pleural rub by asking
the patient to hold their breath.
Electrocardiography
The classic sign of pericarditis – a concave upwards (“saddle”) ST-segment
elevation throughout the 12 leads – is, of course, rare. However, some form of
electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormality is common. These changes are either present
in all 12 leads or in leads that do not correspond to the territory perfused by a
single coronary artery. Low voltages suggest the possibility of effusion.
Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray (CXR) can help to rule out a tuberculous cause of pericarditis and
exclude significant effusion.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is helpful mainly if there is a suspicion of effusion or tamponade.
Blood tests
Blood tests for immune markers, such as the antinuclear cytoplasmic antibody
(ANCA), should be carried out in any patient with confirmed pericarditis. Acute
and convalescent viral titers can also be requested, but rarely alter management.
198
--- Страница 210 ---
Pericardial disease
Figure 2.An extreme form of pericardial effusion, known
as a “swinging heart”. The arrow indicates the effusion.
Management
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the treatment of choice for pericarditis.
They relieve both the inflammatory process and the pain. Steroids may be required
in serositic pericarditis, whereas pericarditis with a suspicious CXR and
constitutional symptoms should prompt investigation for tuberculosis.
Pericardial effusion and tamponade
As with pleural effusion, the key defining presentation of pericardial effusion is the
rate of fluid accumulation. Any cause of pericarditis can result in a significant
accumulation of serous fluid, while hemopericardium (a collection of blood in the
pericardial sac surrounding the heart) can be caused by trauma, type 1 dissection
of the aorta, and cardiac rupture. The key feature is not the overall volume of fluid
(even hundreds of milliliters can be asymptomatic if accumulated over a long
enough time), but the rate of rise – as with pleural effusion, removal of even a small
amount of fluid can result in significant benefit.
Small, asymptomatic effusions can often be left to resorb on their own. This usually
requires repeat echo at regular intervals to ensure that resorption has occurred.
Larger effusions bounded by the tough parietal pericardium can compromise the
low pressure right heart – this results in tamponade (see Figure 2).
Examination
Cardiac tamponade is a medical emergency. It is associated with a characteristic
jugular venous pressure (JVP). Kussmaul’s sign describes a raised JVP that rises
further on inspiration, while Friedrich’s sign describes a steep x/y descent
(although, in reality at the bedside, the waves are hard to discern). The heart
sounds are quiet and there may be a rub.
199
--- Страница 211 ---
Chapter 13
KUSSMAUL’S LEGACY
Adolph Kussmaul was Professor of Medicine successively at Heidelberg, Erlangen,
Freiburg, and Strasbourg. As well as describing the paradoxical increase in JVP on
inspiration in patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy, right ventricular failure,
and constrictive pericarditis, he described the deep-sighing respiration associated
with low arterial pH (Kussmaul breathing) and coined the term “polyarteritis
nodosa”. In fact, Kussmaul’s JVP sign is widely misunderstood to be solely the
result of right ventricular incompliance, when in fact the explanation relates as
much to distension of the mesenteric vascular bed and the change from a right
ventricular pressure that predominantly reflects negative intrapleural pressure
“sucking” blood into the chest, to one that predominantly reflects positive intra-
abdominal pressure “pushing” the greater volume proximally.
A characteristic of cardiac tamponade is pulsus paradoxus, which is not paradoxical
at all, but an exaggeration of the normal drop in systolic pressure on inspiration –
>10 mm Hg is abnormal. To test for it, inflate the cuff to just above systolic
pressure then slowly deflate, stopping each 5 mm Hg for a full
inspiration–expiration cycle. Listen for the point at which the beating becomes
continuous throughout the breathing cycle.
Electrocardiography
Low-voltage ECG and beat-to-beat variation in R-wave amplitude are characteristic.
Chest x-ray
CXRs show a globular, “boot-shaped” heart.
Echocardiography
Echo is the investigation of choice. The key observation is diastolic collapse of the
right atrium and ventricle. It demands urgent pericardiocentesis.
Constrictive pericarditis
In constrictive pericarditis, the pericardium becomes rigid and fibrotic, adheres to
the myocardium, and limits its function. It most commonly follows tuberculous
pericarditis or hemopericardium, but can result from any cause of pericarditis.
200
--- Страница 212 ---
Pericardial disease
The classic clinical picture is:
• significant ascites
• raised JVP with positive Kussmaul and Friedrich’s signs
• hepatomegaly
• pulsus paradoxus (but usually less severe than in tamponade)
• pericardial knock (high-pitched early diastolic added sound)
• calcification visible on the lateral CXR
The most difficult differential diagnosis is restrictive cardiomyopathy. However, the
left ventricular function is usually preserved in constrictive pericarditis, and filling
pressures are raised. The only treatment for constrictive pericarditis is surgical
excision of the pericardium.
201
--- Страница 213 ---
202
--- Страница 214 ---
Chapter 14
Adult congenital heart disease
Congenital abnormalities of the heart and cardiovascular system are reported in
almost 1% of live births (see Figure 1) and about half of these children need
medical or surgical help during infancy. In the first decade, a further 25% require
surgery to maintain or improve their life. Only 10% survive to adolescence without
surgery. Of these 10%, however, many live a normal life for years before their
abnormality is discovered.
Recognizing adult congenital heart disease
There are a few signs that should alert generalists to the possibility of congenital
heart disease:
• murmurs, especially continuous – there are few degenerative
diseases that produce continuous murmurs
• cyanosis, clubbing – unless there is coexistent lung disease, a patient
with a murmur and cyanosis should be referred for echocardiography
• right bundle branch block (RBBB) – this occurs in 1% of the
middle-aged population without disease. When combined with a
murmur, the patient should be referred for echocardiography
In most cases, suspicion of congenital heart disease leads to a cardiology referral.
However, an awareness of the possible diagnoses will help your referral.
Ventricular septal defect
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) (see Figures 2 and 3) is the most common
congenital heart defect. Symptoms depend on the size of the defect and the age of
the patient. Small VSDs are usually asymptomatic and compatible with a normal
life (in fact, about 40% close spontaneously in early childhood). Large VSDs cause
cardiac failure in the second or third month after birth. If a large shunt does not
produce symptoms during infancy, there is usually little disturbance until late
adolescence or early adult life when the patient develops high pulmonary vascular
resistance, breathlessness, fatigue, and cyanosis. There is progression to effort
syncope, recurrent hemoptysis, and heart failure.
203
--- Страница 215 ---
Chapter 14
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
VSD PDA Pulm so tn ea nr oy sis ASD Coarctation aBi orc tiu cs p vi ad lve F ta el tl ro at l’s ogy TGA
Figure 1. The relative incidence of common congenital heart defects. ASD: atrial septal
defect; PDA: patent ductus arteriosus; TGA: transposition of the great arteries;
VSD: ventricular septal defect.
Recognizing VSD
In VSD patients, the apex beat may be hyperdynamic and there could be a systolic
thrill. The classic sign is a loud pansystolic murmur, often accompanied by a mid
diastolic murmur at the apex (due to high flow through the mitral valve) (see
Table 1). In patients with raised pulmonary vascular resistance, right ventricular
hypertrophy (RVH) is evident and the pulmonary second sound might be
accentuated, followed by the early diastolic murmur of pulmonary regurgitation.
With small VSDs, the electrocardiogram (ECG)is normal. With larger ones, there
is evidence of biventricular enlargement (tall R waves and deep S waves in leads
V1–V6), especially when pulmonary vascular resistance is high. Similarly, with a
small defect the chest x-ray (CXR) is normal, but with a large shunt there is
cardiomegaly and prominence of the pulmonary vessels.
Large shunts should be closed surgically. However, if pulmonary hypertension has
developed, surgery is usually contraindicated as closing it may worsen the
pulmonary hypertension.
The main complication of VSD is infective endocarditis. Vegetations may appear at
the tricuspid valve, opposite or around the defect, or on the aortic valve. In certain
lesions, aortic incompetence may develop due to loss of support of the valve.
204
)%(
ecnedicnI
--- Страница 216 ---
Adult congenital heart disease
Ventricular
septal defect
Right ventricle Left ventricle
Figure 2. Ventricular septal defect.
Atrial
septal defect
Right ventricle Left ventricle
Figure 3. Atrial septal defect.
The prognosis for adults with uncomplicated VSD is good. Few patients have
defects large enough to cause serious hemodynamic problems, but all are exposed
to the risk of infective endocarditis.
Atrial septal defect
Three types of atrial septal defect (ASD) can occur:
• ostium secundum is the most common type (70%). It can be large, but
usually does not affect the atrioventricular valves (see Figures 3 and4)
• ostium primum – the hole is situated close to the atrioventricular
valves and can be associated with an atrioventricular septal defect
205
--- Страница 217 ---
Chapter 14
Ventricular septal defect Atrial septal defect
Biventricular hypertrophy LAD, RBBB (primum)
RVH RVH, RAD, RBBB (secundum)
PSM MSM (MDM)
Table 1. Characteristics of atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect. Note the wide,
fixed splitting of the second heart sound in atrial septal defect. LAD: left axis deviation;
MDM: mid diastolic murmur; MSM: mid systolic murmur; PSM: pansystolic accentuation
of murmur; RAD: right axis deviation; RBBB: right bundle branch block; RVH: right
ventricular hypertrophy.
(a) (b)
ASD
ASD
Figure 4.Atrial septal defect (ASD) shown by (a) transesophageal echocardiography, and
(b) transesophageal Doppler.
• sinus venosus is a defect situated near the entrance of the superior
venacava (SVC) or inferior vena cava to the right atrium. It is unusual
and is often associated with partial anomalous pulmonary venous
drainage (usually drainage of the right upper lobe into the SVC)
Pathophysiology
The shunt of blood from the left atrium to the right atrium results in:
• increased volume load and dilatation of the right atrium
and right ventricle (RV)
• increased pulmonary blood flow and enlargement of the
pulmonary arteries
• increase in size of the pulmonary veins
• reduced filling of the left ventricle (LV) and aorta
206
--- Страница 218 ---
Adult congenital heart disease
Over time, the aorta and LV shrink, and pulmonary vascular resistance increases
and causes Eisenmenger syndrome (see below).
Recognizing ASD
Most patients with secundum ASD remain asymptomatic throughout their thirties,
but visit their doctor in middle-age with the onset of breathlessness and fatigue
(note the nonspecific signs). Symptoms are usually progressive and worsened by
the development of atrial arrhythmias. Patients with primum ASD tend to present
earlier and with more severe symptoms.
The classic sign of ASD is wide, fixed splitting of the second heart sound, together
with a systolic murmur due to high flow across the pulmonary valve (see Table 1).
Primum ASD may be accompanied by mitral regurgitation.
ECG might indicate RBBB and either RVH and right axis deviation (secundum) or
left axis deviation (primum) (see Table 1). CXR may show cardiomegaly with a
prominent pulmonary trunk.
Management
ASDs that are large enough to give clear physical signs should be closed.
Closure of an ostium secundum defect is relatively easy and carries a low mortality
rate. Correction of an ostium primum defect, with its associated anomalies, is more
difficult and carries a higher mortality rate. More recently, percutaneous device
closure of small and moderate size ASDs has been possible. In this procedure,
a “butterfly” device (eg, the Clamshell occluder, the Starflex occluder, or the
Amplatzer occluder) is manipulated noninvasively into the heart and “opened”,
whereupon it grasps the defect on either side and closes it (see Figures 5 and6).
Primum ASD requires prophylaxis for infective endocarditis, while secundum
ASD doesnot.
Eisenmenger syndrome
This is the name given to reversal in the direction of a cardiac shunt caused by the
development of pulmonary hypertension. It applies regardless of whether the
shunt is atrial or ventricular. Initial flow is always from high pressure (left) to low
pressure (right), but pulmonary pressure can rise above systemic pressure and
cause a reversal of flow.
Signs of pulmonary hypertension are RVH, pulmonary systolic click, and loud
pulmonary valve closure. CXR shows large main pulmonary arteries and branches
with peripheral pruning. After the development of Eisenmenger physiology, only
heart–lung transplantation is of value in management.
207
--- Страница 219 ---
Chapter 14
Clamshell occluder
LA
RA
IVC
Figure 5.The Clamshell occluder for closure of an atrial septal defect.
IVC: inferior vena cava; LA: left atrium; RA: right atrium.
(a) (b)
Figure 6.The Amplatzer occluder (a) before and (b) after deployment.
208
--- Страница 220 ---
Adult congenital heart disease
Left common
carotid artery Left subclavian
Brachiocephalic artery
artery
Coarctation
Aorta
Figure 7. Coarctation of the aorta.
Bicuspid aortic valve
Bicuspid aortic valves often function normally throughout most of a patient’s life.
However, fibrosis and calcification ultimately lead to aortic stenosis (see Chapter 9,
Valve disease) and an eventual requirement for surgical correction.
Coarctation of the aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing of the lumen, usually just distal to the origin
of the left subclavian artery (see Figure 7). Most commonly, the patient presents
in their twenties or thirties, usually with hypertension. Without surgery, 50% die
before the age of 30 years. Potential treatments include resection of the narrowed
segment with end-to-end anastomosis, repair involving the subclavian artery, and
balloon angioplasty – the role of which remains controversial. Hypertension,
which is often the presenting feature, must be aggressively treated both before and
after surgery (it commonly persists).
Pulmonary valve stenosis
Patients with mild to moderate pulmonary stenosis usually remain asymptomatic
until the onset of atrial flutter/fibrillation or right heart failure, which lead to
breathlessness, ascites, peripheral edema, and a visit to the doctor. Fatigue, slight
dyspnea, and effort syncope occur with severe narrowing. The physical signs
depend on the severity of the obstruction and secondary effects on RV function.
In severe stenosis, the arterial pulse is small and the jugular venous pulse exhibits
a large “a” wave. On palpation, there is nearly always a systolic thrill in the second
left intercostal space and there is a left parasternal heave. An early systolic
209
--- Страница 221 ---
Chapter 14
“ejection” click and a loud ejection murmur are best heard in the second
intercostal space. The second sound is normal in mild cases, but in more severe
cases it is widely split and the second (pulmonary) element is soft. ECG shows
RVH in severe stenosis, while CXR shows a dilated pulmonary trunk with oligemic
lung fields. Balloon valvotomy is indicated in severe pulmonary stenosis. Surgical
valvotomy is an alternative.
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) describes a preservation of the connection between
the pulmonary artery and the aorta that exists in the fetus (see Figure 8). Since
aortic diastolic pressure is higher than pulmonary artery systolic pressure, there is
continuous flow into the pulmonary circulation, creating the characteristic
continuous (“machinery”) murmur, heard best just below the
left clavicle. In hemodynamically insignificant lesions (>50% of cases), patients are
asymptomatic. Patients with bigger shunts develop cardiac failure at an age
that depends on the severity of the lesion. Eisenmenger syndrome can occur
with PDA. Treatment is surgical closure of the duct; this can be carried
out percutaneously.
Fallot’s tetralogy
Fallot’s tetralogy is one of the causes of cyanotic congenital heart disease.
The features derive from an abnormally positioned aorta that “over-rides” the
interventricular septum (see Figure 9). This causes:
• perimembranous VSD
• RV outflow obstruction (pulmonary stenosis)
• RVH
The chief symptom is cyanosis on exercise. Children typically “squat” for relief of
dyspnea after exercise (almost pathognomonic). Chest pain, arrhythmia, and
congestive heart failure are more common in adults than in children. Clubbing is
common. Surgical correction usually involves resection of the hypertrophied RV
infundibulum and VSD closure with incorporation of the aorta into the RV. Adult
Fallot’s patients often suffer impaired exercise capacity due to poor RV function.
Transposition of the great arteries
In transposition of the great arteries (TGA), the RV connects to the aorta and the
LV connects to the pulmonary artery (see Figure 10). The result, following
peripartum closure of the foramen ovale, is two parallel circulations – a physiology
that is not compatible with life. The neonate would die instantly were it not for the
common coexistence of a patent foramen ovale, ASD, VSD, or PDA. In infants, an
210
--- Страница 222 ---
Adult congenital heart disease
Aorta
PDA
Pulmonary
artery
Right ventricle Left ventricle
Figure 8. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
improvement in symptoms can be achieved by creating a large defect in the atrial
septum to allow mixing of the blood between systemic and pulmonary circulations
(Rashkind’s procedure – see Figure 11). This is performed by passing a balloon
catheter into the left atrium via the right atrium. After inflation, the balloon catheter
is pulled back forcefully into the right atrium, creating a tear in the septum. This
procedure is usually effective in the neonatal period and allows the child to live
until the latter part of the first year of life, when the Mustard operation can be
performed. This involves rerouting venous return by inserting an intra-atrial baffle.
The definitive treatment is the arterial switch operation, in which the arteries are
switched back to their appropriate ventricles. The biggest challenge with this
procedure is reattaching the coronary arteries, the anatomical organization of
which is variable in TGA. In addition, the “low pressure” LV must take on filling of
the systemic circulation.
Ebstein’s anomaly
Ebstein’s anomaly is the downward displacement of a portion of the tricuspid
valve with atrialization of a large part of the RV (see Figure 12). There is often an
associated ostium secundum ASD. The atrialized portion of the ventricle hinders
rather than helps the forward flow of blood and there is tricuspid regurgitation.
Occasionally Ebstein’s anomaly is asymptomatic, but it generally presents in
childhood or early adulthood with dyspnea, fatigue, signs of tricuspid
regurgitation, and right-sided cardiac failure. Patients with Ebstein’s anomaly
require prophylaxis for endocarditis.
211
--- Страница 223 ---
Chapter 14
Pulmonary
stenosis Over-riding
aorta
Ventricular
septal defect
Right ventricle Left ventricle
Hypertrophy of
the right ventricle
Figure 9. Fallot’s tetralogy with an “over-riding aorta”.
Pulmonary Pulmonary
artery artery
Aorta Aorta
Figure 10. Transposition of the great arteries (right-hand image).
212
--- Страница 224 ---
Adult congenital heart disease
Balloon-tipped catheter is
Transposition of
inserted through the ASD
great arteries
Once the balloon is inflated,
the catheter is pulled back
Balloon catheter through to widen the ASD
Atrial septum
An opening in the septum
allows oxygen-rich and
oxygen-poor blood to
mix to improve circulation
Figure 11. Balloon atrial septostomy–Rashkind’s procedure. ASD: atrial septal defect.
Aorta
Pulmonary
artery
Abnormal
tricuspid valve
Figure 12. Ebstein’s anomaly.
213
--- Страница 225 ---
Chapter 14
Further reading
Deanfield J, Thaulow E, Warnes C et al.; Task Force on the Management of Grown Up
Congenital Heart Disease, European Society of Cardiology; ESC Committee for Practice
Guidelines. Management of grown up congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J
2003;24:1035–84.
Dent JM. Congenital heart disease and exercise. Clin Sports Med2003;22:81–99.
Morris PJ, Wood WC, editors. Oxford Textbook of Surgery, 2nd edition. Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Report of the British Cardiac Society Working Party. Grown-up congenital heart (GUCH)
disease: current needs and provision of service for adolescents and adults with congenital
heart disease in the UK. Heart2002;88 (Suppl. 1):i1–14.
214
--- Страница 226 ---
Abbreviations
1D one dimensional
2D two dimensional
A wave atrial wave
ABPM ambulatory blood pressure measurement
ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACEI angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
ACS acute coronary syndromes
ADH antidiuretic hormone
AF atrial fibrillation
AICD automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ANCA antinuclear cytoplasmic antibody
AR aortic regurgitation
ARB angiotensin receptor blocker
AS aortic stenosis
ASD atrial septal defect
AST aspartate aminotransferase
AV atrioventricular
AVN atrioventricular node
AVNRT atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia
AVR aortic valve replacement
BP blood pressure
bpm beats per minute
CABG coronary artery bypass grafting
CAD coronary artery disease
CFM color-flow mapping
CHD coronary heart disease
CHF chronic heart failure
CK-MB creatine kinase myocardial band fraction
CNS central nervous system
CPR cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CRP C-reactive protein
CT computed tomography
CW continuous wave
Cx circumflex artery
CXR chest x-ray
215
--- Страница 227 ---
Abbreviations
DC direct current
DCM dilated cardiomyopathy
E wave early wave
ECG electrocardiogram
ED erectile dysfunction
EDV end diastolic volume
EEL external elastic lamina
EF ejection fraction
ESD end systolic dimension
ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate
GFR glomerular filtration rate
GP glycoprotein
HACEK Haemophilus parainfluenza, Haemophilus aphrophilus, Actinobacillus
(Haemophilus) actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis,
the Eikenella species,and the Kingellaspecies
HCM hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HDL high-density lipoprotein
HIT heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HMG-CoA hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A
IABP intra-aortic balloon pump
ICH intracranial hemorrhage
ICS intercostal space
IE infective endocarditis
IEL internal elastic lamina
IM intramuscular
INR international normalized ratio
IV intravenous
IVC inferior vena cava
IVDA intravenous drug abuser
JVP jugular venous pressure
LA left atrium
LAD left anterior descending artery
LBBB left bundle branch block
LDH lactate dehydrogenase
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LIMA left internal mammary artery
LLSE left lower sternal edge
LP lipoprotein
LP(a) lipoprotein little a
LPL lipoprotein lipase
LV left ventricle
LVESD left ventricular end-systolic dimension
216
--- Страница 228 ---
Abbreviations
LVH left ventricular hypertrophy
MET metabolic unit
MI myocardial infarction
MR mitral regurgitation
MRA magnetic resonance angiography
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MS mitral stenosis
MV mitral valve
MVA mitral valve area
MVP mitral valve prolapse
NYHA New York Heart Association
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention
PDA persistent ductus arteriosus
PET positron emission tomography
PTCA percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
PW pulsed wave
QTc corrected QT interval
RA right atrium
RAD right axis deviation
RBBB right bundle branch block
RCA right coronary artery
RIMA right internal mammary artery
RV right ventricle
RVH right ventricular hypertrophy
SA sinoatrial
SAN sinoatrial node
SLE systemic lupus erythematosus
SND sinus node dysfunction
SPECT single photon emission computed tomography
SR sinus rhythm
SVC superior vena cava
SVT supraventricular tachycardia
Tc technetium
TEE transesophageal echocardiography
TGA transposition of the great arteries
TIMI Thrombosis in Myocardial Infarction
TM tunica media
TNF tumor necrosis factor
tPA tissue plasminogen activator
TR tricuspid regurgitation
VLDL very low-density lipoprotein
VO max maximum rate of oxygen consumption
2
217
--- Страница 229 ---
Abbreviations
VSD ventricular septal defect
VT ventricular tachycardia
WPW Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome
218
--- Страница 230 ---
Index
References to figures are in bold
References to tables and boxed material are in italics
(except where there is textual reference on the same page)
A
A waves 8,9, 40
abbreviations 214–18
abciximab 64
accelerated phase hypertension 90–1
acute coronary syndromes 46
assessment 68, 69
treatment 69–73
added heart sounds 11
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
relative positions 11
adenosine challenge 125, 128
adhesion molecules 72
alanine aminotransferase (AST) 68
alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists 85, 87
ambulatory blood pressure measurement (ABPM) 81
American Heart Association
life-support algorithms 4
risk factors for CAD 48
amiloride 103
amiodarone
arrhythmia 106, 141, 142
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183–4
tachycardia 72
ventricular 128, 129
amlodipine 54
amoxicillin/ampicillin 177, 178
Amplatzer occluder 207, 208
aneurysms
aortic 189–91
mycotic 168
sinus of Valsalva 191
angina 47
pharmacological management 54–7
silent 48
specialist management
assessment 57–63
treatment 63–7
stable 46
219
--- Страница 231 ---
Index
symptoms 47
unstable 46, 47
variant 48
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
acute coronary syndromes 72–3
and aspirin 106
heart failure 101, 104, 106
hypertension 85, 86, 87, 88
recommended procedure for starting 104
angiotensin type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs)
heart failure 106
hypertension 85, 86, 87
annuloplasty 162
antiarrhythmic drugs 106, 141, 142
antibiotics
infective endocarditis 173, 174–5
prophylaxis 176, 177–8, 207, 211
pacemaker infection 138
pregnancy 164
anticoagulation 54, 71, 131, 132, 134, 156, 164
antihypertensives 82–8
centrally-acting 86
mechanisms 83
antithrombotic therapy 64
aorta 37, 191
aortic aneurysm 189–91
thoracic 189, 191
aortic dissection 191–5
classification 192, 193
examination 195
imaging 192, 193, 194
investigations 194, 195
management 193
presentation 194
aortic regurgitation 149–52
acute 150
asymptomatic patients 152
chronic
causes 150–1
treatment 151–2
common associations 12
echocardiography 41
in pregnancy 164
pulse 7
signs 149–50
aortic root replacement 176, 193
aortic sclerosis 146
aortic stenosis
causes 146
common associations 12
echocardiography 41
220
--- Страница 232 ---
Index
investigation/management 147–9
natural history 148
in pregnancy 164
pulse 7
signs 146–7
treatment 149
valve replacement 148
aortic valve, bicuspid 204, 209
aortic valve replacement (AVR) 148, 149, 151
apex beat
abnormalities 9–10
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
location 9
arrhythmia 111–43
antiarrhythmic drugs 106, 141, 142
diagnosis, possible 112
pulse 112
and thrombolysis 72
see alsospecific conditions
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 68
aspirin
acute coronary syndromes 69
angina 54
atrial fibrillation 133
chronic heart failure 106
mitral valve prolapse 162
asthma 125
atenolol 141
atherectomy 64
atherosclerosis seecoronary artery disease
atrial fibrillation 130–4
bradycardia in 118
classification 130
ECG 22, 23, 130, 131
history 134
incidence/causes 130
investigations 133
management
chronic 131
new directions 134
pharmacological 131, 132
surgery 134
management of new patient 130–3
pacing 136, 136
permanent 133
presentation 130
with pulmonary stenosis 209
pulse 7
in restrictive cardiomyopathy 188
atrial flutter 134
ECG 22, 23, 135
221
--- Страница 233 ---
Index
with pulmonary stenosis 209
atrial septal defect 205–9
characteristics 206
common associations 13
incidence 204
management 207
pathophysiology 206–7
signs/symptoms 207
atrial tachycardia 123, 124
atrioventricular (AV) block 117–18
ECG 25
electrophysiology 141
first-degree 118, 119
second-degree 7, 118, 119, 136
third-degree (complete heart block) 118, 119, 135, 136
atrioventricular (AV) node 112
atrioventricular node re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) 124–5
ECG 125
electrophysiology 141
mechanisms 126
atropine 3, 113
auscultation 10–11
Austin Flint murmur 150
automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD) 129, 139–40
azithromycin 32, 177
B
balloon angioplasty 63, 65, 209
balloon pump, intra-aortic 157
counterpulsation 99
insertion 99
balloon septostomy 211, 213
balloon valvotomy 149, 164
beating heart surgery 66
bendrofluazide 84, 87, 103
benzothiazepines 84
beta-agonists 94, 95, 98
beta-blockers
acute coronary syndromes 69, 70, 72–3
angina 54
aortic dissection 193
aortic regurgitation 150
arrhythmia 141, 142
atrial fibrillation 133
heart failure 101, 104–5, 106
hypertension 83–4, 86, 87, 88
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
syncope 117
tachyarrhythmia 123, 125
toxicity 118
Bezold–Jarisch reflex 116, 117
222
--- Страница 234 ---
Index
bicuspid aortic valve 204, 209
bifascicular block 121
bisferiens pulse 7
blood flow
assessment 63, 64
exercise-induced changes 52
perfusion imaging 60
velocity 36
blood pressure
basic science 90
guidelines 77
heart failure 98
measurement 78
24-hour ambulatory 81
see alsohypertension
blood tests
heart failure 97
pericarditis 198
blood vessels, normal 73
Bonet, T 102
“boot-shaped” heart 200
bounding pulse 7
bradycardia 111–19
in atrial fibrillation 118
atrioventricular (AV) block 117–18
classification 118, 119
carotid sinus syndrome 114
causes 113
pacing 135, 136, 136
sinus node dysfunction (SND) 113–14
syncope 114
disturbances leading to 115
evaluation 114–15, 116
malignant vasovagal 116–17
patterns 116
treatment 113
Bruce exercise protocol 57, 58
bumetanide 103
bundle branch block 120–2
ECG 26, 27, 30, 120
fascicular block 120–1
nonspecific intraventricular conduction defect 122
bundle of His 18, 112, 120, 121
bundle of Kent 125–7
bupropion 49
“butterfly” occluding devices 207, 208
C
cachexia 5
CAD seecoronary artery disease
caffeine and hypertension 78, 82
223
--- Страница 235 ---
Index
calcification, valve 153
calcium-channel blockers
acute coronary syndromes 73
angina 54
aortic dissection 193
atrial fibrillation 133
hypertension 84, 87, 88
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
toxicity 118
calcium levels
in atherosclerotic plaque 62
hypertension 80
calcium sensitizers 106
captopril 101
carcinoid syndrome 188
cardiac arrest
causes 2, 3
electrophysiology 141
life-support algorithms 1–3
cardiac catheterization 63–6, 69
aortic stenosis 149
complications 65
history 63
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 184
mortality 66
cardiac markers seemarkers
cardiac rehabilitation 74, 75
cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) 107
cardiac tamponade 199–200
examination 199–200
imaging 200
pulse 7
cardiogenic shock
management 99
and PTCA 70
cardiomegaly 98
cardiomyopathy seedilated cardiomyopathy; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; restrictive
cardiomyopathy
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 2, 3
cardiovascular examinations seeexaminations, cardiovascular
cardioversion
chemical 133
direct current (DC) 127, 133, 134
implantable cardioverter defibrillators 139–40
spontaneous 130–1
carotid sinus massage 124
carotid sinus syndrome 114, 136
catheterization seecardiac catheterization
cefadroxil 177
cefazolin 177
cephalexin 177
224
--- Страница 236 ---
Index
chemokines 52, 72
chest leads seeunderelectrocardiography
chest pain
atypical 47
differentiation 47
investigations 53
likelihood of CAD 59
chest X-ray
aortic dissection 194
cardiac tamponade 200
cardiomegaly 98
coronary artery disease 54
dilated cardiomyopathy 187
heart failure 93, 96, 97, 98
pericarditis 198
pleural effusion 97, 98
pulmonary stenosis 210
ventricular septal defect 204
cholesterol
and coronary artery disease 52
as risk factor 48, 49, 50–1
synthesis/transport 55, 56
cholestyramine 56
chronotropic incompetence 136
chylomicrons 55, 56
Clamshell occluder 207, 208
clarithromycin 32, 177
clindamycin 32, 177
clonidine 85, 86
clopidogrel 54, 64, 69
cloxacillin (flucloxacillin) 138, 175
clubbing 5, 6, 167, 203, 210
coarctation of aorta 172, 204, 209
collapsing pulse 7
complete heart block 118, 119, 135, 136
computed tomography (CT) 192
congenital bicuspid disease 164
congenital heart disease 203–14
atrial septal defect 13, 204, 205–9
bicuspid aortic valve 204
children 203
coarctation of aorta 172, 204, 209
Ebstein’s anomaly 162, 211, 213
Fallot’s tetralogy 204, 210, 212
patent ductus arteriosus 7, 13, 204, 210
pulmonary stenosis 13, 204, 209–10
right bundle branch block 203
signs 6, 203
transposition of the great arteries 204, 210–11, 212
ventricular septal defect 13, 157, 172, 203–5
Conn’s syndrome 80
225
--- Страница 237 ---
Index
constrictive pericarditis 200–1
contractile proteins 181, 182
contrast echocardiography 38–9
corneal arcus 6
coronary angiography (the first example of) 66
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 66, 67
coronary artery disease (atherosclerosis) 45–76, 189, 191
assessment 47–8
background 45–6
diagnostic algorithm 59, 61
door-to-needle time 53
initiation 72
investigations 53–4
management 48–57
pharmacological management 54–7
presentations 46
risk factors 48–53
American Heart Association 48
European Society of Cardiology 49
risk estimation 53
risk tables 50–1, 53
specialist management
assessment 57–63
evidence base 67
treatment 63–7
see alsoacute coronary syndromes; angina
Corrigan’s sign 149
cotrimoxazole 175
Coumadin see warfarin
creatine kinase 68, 69
creatine kinase myocardial band fraction (CKMB) 68, 69
cyanosis 203, 210
cyanotic heart disease 172, 210
D
de Musset, A 161
de Musset’s sign 149
depolarization 18, 20
diabetes 48, 51, 88
therapy 72
diastolic dysfunction 40
diet 52, 75, 82
digoxin/digitalis 107
atrial fibrillation 133
heart failure 105, 106
mechanism of action 105
toxicity 30, 118
dihydropyridines 54, 73, 84
dilated cardiomyopathy 186–7
diltiazem
acute coronary syndromes 69
226
--- Страница 238 ---
Index
angina 54
aortic dissection 193
arrhythmia 141
hypertension 84, 86
dimensions, intracardiac 39
disopyramide 117, 129, 141
diuretics
heart failure 102, 103
hypertension 84, 87, 88
diving reflex 125
dobutamine 60, 107, 150, 157, 184
dopamine 150
Doppler imaging 36–8
aortic stenosis 147–9
atrial septal defect 206
color-flow mapping 38
continuous-wave 37
normal values 39
pulsed-wave 37, 40
doxazosin 85, 87
doxycycline 175
Dressler’s syndrome 198
drug abuse, intravenous 162, 169, 175
drug-eluting stents 63
drug-induced abnormalities of ECG 29, 30, 32
drug toxicity 118
Duchenne de Boulogne, GBA 24
Duke criteria 170
Duke risk score 60
Duroziez’s sign 149
dyspnea 48, 95, 108
acute nocturnal 95
after exercise 210
E
E waves 40
E:A ratios 39, 40
Ebstein’s anomaly 162, 211, 213
echocardiography 35–43
aortic dissection 193
aortic stenosis 147–9
applications 39–42
atrial septal defect 206
background 35
cardiac tamponade 200
contrast 38–9
dilated cardiomyopathy 187
EF measurements 100
fractional shortening 39
heart failure 93, 97, 100
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
227
--- Страница 239 ---
Index
imaging modes 35–8
see alsoM-mode imaging; two-dimensional imaging
infective endocarditis 42, 174, 175
mitral regurgitation 157
mitral stenosis 155
mitral valve vegetation 158, 172
normal values 39
pericarditis 198
restrictive cardiomyopathy 187–8
syncope 115
transesophageal (TEE) 38
views 35, 36
see alsostress echocardiography
Einthoven, W 25
Eisenmenger syndrome 207, 210
ejection click 11, 147, 210
elderly patients
aortic stenosis 146
hypertension 87–8
valve replacement 149
electrocardiography (ECG) 15–33
aortic stenosis 146
atrial fibrillation 131
atrial flutter 135
atrial tachycardia 124
AV block 119
AV re-entrant tachycardia 125
axis calculation 22–3
bundle branch block 120
cardiac tamponade 200
carrying out 15
coronary artery disease 53–4
discovery 25
electrophysiological studies 140, 141, 142
exercise ECG seeexercise electrocardiography
general principles 15, 16
heart failure 96
history
discovery 25
dog demonstrating ECG 18
first resuscitation 24
lettering system 33
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
interpretation 21–2
leads
attachment sites 16
chest 17, 20
definitions 15
limb 16, 17
respective views of heart 17
left axis deviation 122
228
--- Страница 240 ---
Index
mitral stenosis 155
pacemakers 139
pericarditis 198
planes of view 17
pulmonary stenosis 210
rate/rhythm 22
restrictive cardiomyopathy 187
right axis deviation 123
syncope 114–15
trace 19–23
basic pattern 19
drug-induced abnormalities 29
lettering system 33
normal 21
pattern combinations 30
see alsospecific segments/waves
variations
normal 24
pathological 25–33
ventricular septal defect 204
wave direction/size 21
see alsoexercise electrocardiography
electron beam computed tomography 62
electrophysiological studies 140–1
indications 141
embolism sources, cardiac 42
end-organ damage in hypertension 80
endocarditis seeinfective endocarditis
endomyocardial fibrosis 188
endothelin antagonists 106
energy-related proteins 181
enterococci 170, 171
eosinophilic cardiomyopathy 188
eptifibatide 64
erectile dysfunction 88–9
esmolol 125
European Society of Cardiology
risk factors for cardiovascular disease 78
risk factors for coronary artery disease 49
examinations, cardiovascular 5–14, 47
auscultation 10–11
general inspection 5
jugular venous pressure 7–9
palpation 9–10
pulse 5–6
exercise
in angina 53
in aortic regurgitation 152
beneficial effects 52–3
cardiac rehabilitation 75
and chest pain 47
229
--- Страница 241 ---
Index
Fallot’s tetralogy 210
and hypertension 82
ventricular ectopics in 129
exercise electrocardiography 57
contraindications 59
interpretation 58
pretest likelihood of disease 58, 59
stable angina 57–9
stopping, reasons for 59
exercise testing 115, 149, 151
with gas analysis 100
exercise training 106
F
facial signs 6
Fallot’s tetralogy 210, 212
incidence 204
fascicular block 120–1
fatty acid binding proteins as markers 68
fibrates 56
first-degree AV block 118, 119
flecainide 30, 129, 131, 133, 141, 142
Forssmann, W 63
Framingham risk tables 78
Frank–Starling curve 95, 159
Friedrich’s sign 199
fungal infections 171, 175
furosemide (frusemide) 98, 103
G
genetic disorders 5
gentamicin 175, 178
Goswell, T 18
GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors
acute coronary syndromes 69, 70, 71
angina 64
H
HACEK organisms 170, 171, 173
“hardening of arteries” 45, 47
heart block seeatrioventricular (AV) block
heart failure 93–109
background 93
causes 93
chronic 96
diagnosis/assessment 100
nonpharmacological treatment 106–8
pharmacological treatment 100–1, 104–6
examination/clinical history 95
history 102
investigations 96–7
230
--- Страница 242 ---
Index
management 102, 103
acute heart failure 98
chronic heart failure 100–1, 104–6
future directions 106
history 107
by NYHA classification 106
palliative care 108
pathophysiology 94–5
with pulmonary stenosis 209
symptoms, multiorgan 94
systolic vs diastolic 93
treatment 95
heart fatty-acid binding proteins 68
heart murmur
asymptomatic 145–6
grading 145
heart sounds 10–11
added 11, 12, 13
aortic regurgitation 150
aortic stenosis 149
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
atrial septal defect 207
cardiac tamponade 199
congenital heart disease 203
mitral regurgitation 154, 159
mitral stenosis 154, 155
mitral valve prolapse 161
patent ductus arteriosus 210
pericarditis 198
physiological splitting 10
pulmonary stenosis 209–10
relative positions 11
ventricular septal defect 204
heart “wiring” 112
Heberden, W 47
heparin 69, 70–1, 164
Herrick, JA 45
hibernating myocardium 62
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 48, 49, 53, 55–57
history-taking 47, 78
Holter monitoring 114–15
homocystinuria 87, 191
Hopps, J 137
hydralazine
heart failure 105, 106
hypertension 85, 88
hydrochlorothiazide 87, 103
hyperaldosteronism 80
hyperkalemia 30, 31
hyperlipidemia 6, 55–6
hypertension 77–91
231
--- Страница 243 ---
Index
assessment
examination 79–80
history-taking 78
investigations 80–1, 89
background 77
basic science 90
blood pressure guidelines 77
causes 78, 79
definition 77–8
malignant/accelerated phase 90–1
management
generalist 89
lifestyle changes 81–2
pharmacotherapy 82–7
special populations 87–9
resistant 81, 90
symptoms 78
systolic vs diastolic 86–7
hypertensive retinopathy 81
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) 181–6
background 181–2
echocardiography 42
examinations 183
management
medical 183–4
nonsurgical septal reduction 184
pacing 184
surgery 184–5
mutations causing 181, 182
nonobstructive 186
pulse 7
screening before sport 185–6
I
imidazoline type 1 receptor agonists 85, 86
infective endocarditis
causative organisms 169–71, 175
diagnostic classification 169, 170
echocardiography 42, 174, 175
investigations 173–4
location 162
and mitral regurgitation 159
pathogenesis 172
prognosis 176
prophylaxis 176, 177–8, 207, 211
prosthetic valves 172–3
referral 173
signs 6, 167
symptoms 167–9
constitutional 167
eyes 168
232
--- Страница 244 ---
Index
neurological 168
renal 168
skin lesions 167
treatment
antibiotics 173, 174–5
surgical 175–6
and ventricular septal defect 204, 205
inflammation in atherosclerosis 72
inotropes 72, 94, 95
intra-aortic balloon pump
counterpulsation 99
insertion 99
in mitral regurgitation 157
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) 70
irregularly irregular pulse 7
isoproterenol (isoprenaline) 113
isotopes in CAD assessment 59, 60
J
Janeway lesions 6, 167, 170
Jenner, E 47
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome 30, 130
“jet” lesions 159, 172
jugular veins 9
jugular venous pressure (JVP) 7–9
abnormalities 9
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
positioning 8, 9
waveforms 8
K
Kavanagh, T 74
Kussmaul, A 200
Kussmaul breathing 200
Kussmaul’s sign 199, 200
L
labetalol 88, 91, 193
lactate dehydrogenase 68, 69
Laennec 148
left anterior/posterior fascicular block 121
left bundle branch 112
left bundle branch block (LBBB)
ECG 26, 27, 120
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
left ventricular hypertrophy
ECG 26, 29
with hypertension 80–1
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 181
left ventricular mass in HCM 183
lidocaine (lignocaine)
233
--- Страница 245 ---
Index
arrhythmia 141, 142
ventricular tachycardia 128
life-support algorithms for cardiac arrest
advanced UK 2, 4
advanced US 3, 4
basic adult 1, 4
lifestyle changes
acute coronary syndromes 74
and hypertension 81–2
limb leads seeunderelectrocardiography
Lincoln, A 190
lipid-lowering agents 55–7
lipid transport 55, 56
lipoproteins 55–56
loop diuretics 84
heart failure 98, 103
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 48, 49, 55–57, 72
M
M-mode imaging 36, 37
Mackenzie, J 134
macrophage foam cells 46, 72
magnesium
in ventricular tachycardia 72, 128
in pregnancy 88
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) 62–3
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
angina 62–3
aortic dissection 192
pacemakers 139
malar flush 6
malignant hypertension 90–1
malignant vasovagal syncope 116–17
pacing 136
Marfan’s syndrome 5, 189, 190, 191
markers
inflammation 72
myocardial damage 68, 69
Maze procedure 134
methyldopa 85, 86, 88
metolazone 101, 103
metoprolol 101, 131
microbubbles 38–9
minoxidil 85
mitral regurgitation 157–60
acute 157–8
asymptomatic patients 159–60
causes 154, 158, 160
chronic 158–60
common associations 12
echocardiography 41
234
--- Страница 246 ---
Index
functional 160
natural history 159
in pregnancy 164
signs 154, 158, 159
therapy 160
mitral stenosis 152–7
and atrial fibrillation 156–7
causes 152, 154
common associations 12
echocardiography 41, 42, 155
ECG 155
left atrial dilatation 154
in pregnancy 164
signs 6, 153–4, 155
therapy 155
medical 156
surgical 155–6
mitral valve apparatus 153
mitral valves
echocardiography 37
prolapse 42, 161–2
repair/replacement 156
vegetation 158, 172
Mobitz I (Wenckebach) AV block 118, 119
Mobitz II AV block 118, 119
pacing 136
Morgagni, G 47
morphine 108
Morrow procedure 184
Müller’s sign 150
murmurs 11
adult congenital heart disease 203
aortic regurgitation 147, 149–150
aortic stenosis 147
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
asymptomatic 145–146
atrial septal defect 206, 207
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
infective endocarditis 167, 170
mitral regurgitation 154, 157, 158, 159
mitral stenosis 154, 155
mitral valve prolapse 161
patent ductus arteriosus 210
in pregnancy 163
preparticipation screening in sport 185
pulmonary valve disease 163
pulmonary valve stenosis 210
tricuspid valve disease 162
ventricular septal defect 204, 206
Mustard operation 211
mycotic aneurysms 168
235
--- Страница 247 ---
Index
myocardial fiber disarray 182
myocardial infarction (MI) 46
in acute coronary syndromes 70
acute, definition of 46
anteroseptal 27
ECG 25, 27
thrombosis in 45
myoglobin 68, 69
N
natriuretic peptides 97
neutral endopeptidase inhibitors 106
nicorandil 55
nifedipine 152
nitrates
acute coronary syndromes 69
angina 54
heart failure 98, 105, 106
nitric oxide 52
nitroprusside 91, 150, 157
nonspecific intraventricular conduction defect 122
nuclear cardiology 59–61
O
opiates 69, 108
orthopnea 95
Osler, W 171
Osler’s nodes 6, 167, 168, 170
ostium primum/secundum 205, 207
oxygen therapy 69
P
P waves 19, 22
abnormalities 30
atrial tachycardia 123
pacemaker syndrome 138
pacemakers 135–40
AAI 136
automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD) 139–40
avoidance of magnetic fields 139
codes 135–6, 137
complications 138–9
DDD 118, 121, 135–6, 138, 184
DDI 114
ECG 139
first artificial 24
history 137
implantation 137–8
indications, standard 136
mode switching 138
patient follow-up 139
236
--- Страница 248 ---
Index
permanent dual-chamber 114, 123
program alteration 138
rate-adaptive 136
single lead atrial 114
testing 137
VVI 136, 138
pacing
atrial fibrillation 136
atrial tachycardia 123
atrioventricular (AV) block 118, 135, 136
bifascicular block 121
bradycardia 114, 135, 136
external 113
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 184
sinus node dysfunction 136
syncope 136
trifascicular block 121
palpation 9–10
papillary muscle dysfunction 157, 160
paraprosthetic regurgitation 42
Parry, C 47
patent ductus arteriosus 210, 211
common associations 13
incidence 204
pulse 7
patent foramen ovale 210
patient education in chronic heart failure 100–1
percutaneous techniques 63, 64–6
balloon aortic valvotomy 149
balloon mitral valvotomy 164
evidence base 67
valvotomy 155–6
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) 63, 70
perfusion imaging 59–61
pericardial disease 197–201
cardiac tamponade 199–200
pericardial effusion 199
pericarditis 197–9
constrictive 200–1
pericardial effusion 199
pericarditis 197–9
causes 198
constrictive 200–1
ECG 29
examination 198
imaging 198
investigations 198
management 199
pathophysiology 197
presentations 198
pericardium 197
237
--- Страница 249 ---
Index
petechiae 167
phenylalkylamine derivatives 84
physical activity seeexercise
pipercillin 175
pitting edema 5
plaques, coronary
formation 72
range 45
ruptured 45, 46
stable 45, 46
unstable 45, 46
pleural effusion 97
potassium blood levels 80, 97
potassium-channel openers 55
potassium-sparing diuretics 103, 104
PR interval 19
abnormalities 30
prazosin 85, 87
pregnancy and hypertension 88
procainamide 141
propafenone 32, 129, 141
proptosis 6
prostacyclin 52
prosthetic valve endocarditis 173, 174
prothrombotic factors 45
pulmonary edema 95, 102
pulmonary embolism 30
pulmonary hypertension 13, 207
pulmonary regurgitation 12
pulmonary stenosis 13, 204, 209–10
pulmonary valve disease 163
pulses 5–7
abnormal 7
associations in clinical examination 12, 13
peripheral 6
pulsus alternans 7
pulsus paradoxus 7, 200
Purkinje system 18
Q
Q waves 25, 26
QRS wave complex 19, 20, 22, 25
abnormalities 27, 30, 31
large/broad 27
sinus wave 30, 33
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome 126
QT interval
abnormalities 29, 30
drug-induced 29, 30, 32
torsade de pointes 129–30
Quincke’s sign 150
238
--- Страница 250 ---
Index
quinidine 141, 142
R
radioactive stents 64
radiofemoral delay 80
radiofrequency ablation
atrial flutter 134
tachyarrhythmia 123, 125
Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome 127
Rashkind’s procedure 211, 213
recanalization 71
referral
acute coronary syndromes 73
aortic stenosis 146
coronary artery disease 57
hypertension 89
regularly irregular pulse 7
renin–angiotensin system antagonists 85
resistant hypertension 81, 90
restrictive cardiomyopathy 187–8
Resuscitation Council (UK) 4
resuscitation, first electrical 24
retinopathy, hypertensive 80
revascularization 107
rheumatic heart disease 152, 162, 172
rifampicin 175
right bundle branch 112
right bundle branch block (RBBB)
and congenital heart disease 203
ECG 27, 30, 120
right ventricular hypertrophy 27
risk estimation of coronary artery disease 53
risk tables
coronary artery disease 50–1, 53
and hypertension 78
Romano–Ward syndrome 30, 130
Roth spots 168, 170
S
saphenous vein graft 66, 67
sawtooth P waves 23
scavenger receptors 72
second-degree AV block 118, 119
secondary hypertension 79
sick sinus syndrome seesinus node dysfunction
sildenafil 89
single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) 60
sinoatrial node (SAN) 18, 112
sinus node dysfunction (sick sinus syndrome) 113–14, 136, 141
sinus of Valsalva, aneurysm of 191
sinus tachycardia 123
239
--- Страница 251 ---
Index
sinus venosus 206
smoking
cessation 49, 82
as risk factor 48, 49, 50–1
sodium levels
heart failure 97
hypertension 80
Sokolow–Lyon index 27
sotalol 30, 32, 129, 141, 142, 184
specialist nursing 108
spironolactone 83, 101, 102, 103, 104, 106
splinter hemorrhages 6, 167, 168
spondyloarthritides 5
ST segment 21
abnormalities 27, 28–9
diagnostic exercise tests 57–8
elevation in acute coronary syndromes 70
reverse tick depression 30
staphylococci 170, 171
Starflex occluder 207
statins 56, 57
stents 63, 65, 67
stethoscope, invention of 148
Stokes–Adams attacks 118
“strain” 26, 29, 30
streptococci 169, 170
streptokinase 70–1
stress echocardiography 61–2
stunned atria 133
stunned myocardium 62
“swinging heart” 199
sympathomimetics 85
syncope 114
disturbances leading to 115
electrophysiology 141
evaluation 114–15, 116
malignant vasovagal 116–17
pacing 136
patterns 116
syndrome X 48
systolic dysfunction 40
T
T waves 21
abnormalities 26, 29, 30
inversion 28
tachyarrhythmia 122–34
atrial fibrillation 130–4
atrial flutter 134
atrial tachycardia 123, 124
AV node re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT) 124–5, 126
240
--- Страница 252 ---
Index
diagnosis 122, 124
ECG 122
sinus tachycardia 123
torsade de pointes 129–30
ventricular ectopics 129
ventricular pre-excitation 125–7
ventricular tachycardia 128–9
tachycardia–bradycardia syndrome seesinus node dysfunction
teeth 5
teicoplanin 175
thiazide diuretics
heart failure 103
hypertension 84, 86, 87, 88
third-degree AV block (complete heart block) 118, 119, 135, 136
three-vessel disease 66
thrombolysis 70
acute coronary syndromes 70–1
arrhythmia 72
complications 70
contraindications 71
recanalization after 71
thrombosis 45, 46
thyroid problems 80
ticlopidine 64
tilt-table testing 117
TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) 63, 64
tirofiban 64
tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 70, 71
TNF-αantibodies 106
torasemide 103
torsades de pointes 32, 129–30
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) 38, 174
transplantation 107–8
transposition of the great arteries 204, 210–11, 212
transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography 174
Traube’s sign 150
triamterene 103
tricuspid valve disorders
Ebstein’s anomaly 162, 211, 213
regurgitation 12
stenosis 13
tricuspid valve replacement 162
trifascicular block 121
triglycerides 55
troponins 46, 64, 68, 69, 70, 181, 182
Twiddler’s syndrome 138
two-dimensional imaging 35, 36
U
ultrasound 35
see alsoechocardiography; stress echocardiography
241
--- Страница 253 ---
Index
V
vagolytics 117
Valsalva maneuver 124
valve assessment 41
valve disease 145–65
aortic regurgitation 149–52
aortic stenosis 146–9
heart murmur 145–6
mitral regurgitation 157–60
mitral stenosis 152–7
mitral valve prolapse 161–2
in pregnancy 163–4
pulmonary 163
tricuspid 162–3
valve replacement
aortic (AVR) 148, 149, 151, 193
in endocarditis 176
tricuspid 162
vancomycin 175, 178
vasoconstrictive factors 45
vasodilators 60, 85, 95, 105, 152, 164
Vaughan-Williams classification 141
vector diagram of QRS axis 23
vegetations
infective endocarditis 172, 173, 204
mitral valves 158, 159
ventricular assist devices 107–8
ventricular dysynchrony 107
ventricular ectopics (premature beats) 129
ventricular hypertrophy
left 26, 29
right 27
ventricular pre-excitation 125–7
ventricular septal defect 157, 172, 203–5
characteristics 206
common associations 13
incidence 204
ventricular tachycardia 128–9
chronic 129
ECG 128
polymorphic vs monomorphic 129
ventriculography 60, 61
verapamil
angina 54
aortic dissection 193
arrhythmia 141
hypertension 84, 86
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 183
tachyarrhythmia 125
viral pericarditis 198
242
--- Страница 254 ---
Index
W
wall-motion abnormality 40–1
Waller, AD 18, 25
warfarin
acute coronary syndromes 73
angina 54
atrial fibrillation 131, 133
mitral valve prolapse 162
in pregnancy 164
waterhammer pulse 7, 149
weight reduction 75, 82
Welch, H 102
Wenckebach (Mobitz I) AV block 118, 119
Withering, W 107
Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome 125–6
ECG 127
electrophysiology 141
history 127
X
xanthomata 6
Z
Zyban 49
243
--- Страница 255 ---
244
