=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:12.415435",
  "file_size_bytes": 542691,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
Ashley EA, Niebauer J. Cardiology Explained. London: Remedica; 2004.
Chapter 3 Conquering the ECG
Besides the stethoscope, the electrocardiogram (ECG) is the oldest and most enduring tool of the
cardiologist. A basic knowledge of the ECG will enhance the understanding of cardiology (not to
mention this book).
Electrocardiography
At every beat, the heart is depolarized to trigger its contraction. This electrical activity is
transmitted throughout the body and can be picked up on the skin. This is the principle behind
the ECG. An ECG machine records this activity via electrodes on the skin and displays it
graphically. An ECG involves attaching 10 electrical cables to the body: one to each limb and six
across the chest.
ECG terminology has two meanings for the word "lead":
the cable used to connect an electrode to the ECG recorder
the electrical view of the heart obtained from any one combination of electrodes
Carrying out an ECG
1. Ask the patient to undress down to the waist and lie down
2. Remove excess hair where necessary
3. Attach limb leads (anywhere on the limb)
4. Attach the chest leads (see Figure 1) as follows:
V1 and V2: either side of the sternum on the fourth rib (count down from the
sternal angle, the second rib insertion)
V4: on the apex of the heart (feel for it)
V3: halfway between V2 and V4
V5 and V6: horizontally laterally from V4 (not up towards the axilla)
5. Ask the patient to relax
6. Press record
Figure 1
Standard attachment sites for chest leads.
The standard ECG uses 10 cables to obtain 12 electrical views of the heart. The different views
reflect the angles at which electrodes "look" at the heart and the direction of the heart's electrical
depolarization.
Limb leads
 1/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
Three bipolar leads and three unipolar leads are obtained from three electrodes attached to the
left arm, the right arm, and the left leg, respectively. (An electrode is also attached to the right
leg, but this is an earth electrode.) The bipolar limb leads reflect the potential difference between
two of the three limb electrodes:
lead I: right arm–left arm
lead II: right arm–left leg
lead III: left leg–left arm
The unipolar leads reflect the potential difference between one of the three limb electrodes and
an estimate of zero potential – derived from the remaining two limb electrodes. These leads are
known as augmented leads. The augmented leads and their respective limb electrodes are:
aVR lead: right arm
aVL lead: left arm
aVF lead: left leg
Chest leads
Another six electrodes, placed in standard positions on the chest wall, give rise to a further six
unipolar leads – the chest leads (also known as precordial leads), V1–V6. The potential
difference of a chest lead is recorded between the relevant chest electrode and an estimate of zero
potential – derived from the average potential recorded from the three limb leads.
Planes of view
The limb leads look at the heart in a vertical plane (see Figure 2), whereas the chest leads look at
the heart in a horizontal plane. In this way, a three-dimensional electrical picture of the heart is
built up (see Table 1).
Figure 2
The limb leads looking at the heart in a vertical plane.
Table 1
ECG leads and their respective views of the heart.
Performing Dogs
British physiologist Augustus D Waller of St Mary's Medical School, London, published the
first human electrocardiogram in the British Medical Journal in 1888. It was recorded from
Thomas Goswell, a technician in the laboratory, using a capillary electrometer. After that,
Waller used a more available subject for his demonstrations – his dog Jimmy, who would
patiently stand with his paws in glass jars of saline.
Depolarization of the heart
The route that the depolarization wave takes across the heart is outlined in Figure 3. The
sinoatrial node (SAN) is the heart's pacemaker. From the SAN, the wave of depolarization
 2/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
spreads across the atria to the atrioventricular node (AVN). The impulse is delayed briefly at the
AVN and atrial contraction is completed.
Figure 3
The cardiac depolarization route. AVN: atrioventricular node;
SAN: sinoatrial node. Reproduced with permission from WB
Saunders (Guyton A, Hall J. Textbook of Medical Physiology.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996).
The wave of depolarization then proceeds rapidly to the bundle of His where it splits into two
pathways and travels along the right and left bundle branches. The impulse travels the length of
the bundles along the interventricular septum to the base of the heart, where the bundles divide
into the Purkinje system. From here, the wave of depolarization is distributed to the ventricular
walls and initiates ventricular contraction.
The ECG trace
The ECG machine processes the signals picked up from the skin by electrodes and produces a
graphic representation of the electrical activity of the patient's heart. The basic pattern of the
ECG is logical:
electrical activity towards a lead causes an upward deflection
electrical activity away from a lead causes a downward deflection
depolarization and repolarization deflections occur in opposite directions
The basic pattern of this electrical activity was first discovered over a hundred years ago. It
comprises three waves, which have been named P, QRS (a wave complex), and T (see Figure 4).
Figure 4
The basic pattern of electrical activity across the heart.
P wave
The P wave is a small deflection wave that represents atrial depolarization.
PR interval
The PR interval is the time between the first deflection of the P wave and the first deflection of
the QRS complex.
QRS wave complex
The three waves of the QRS complex represent ventricular depolarization. For the inexperienced,
one of the most confusing aspects of ECG reading is the labeling of these waves. The rule is: if
the wave immediately after the P wave is an upward deflection, it is an R wave; if it is a
downward deflection, it is a Q wave:
small Q waves correspond to depolarization of the interventricular septum. Q waves can
also relate to breathing and are generally small and thin. They can also signal an old
myocardial infarction (in which case they are big and wide)
the R wave reflects depolarization of the main mass of the ventricles –hence it is the
largest wave
 3/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
the S wave signifies the final depolarization of the ventricles, at the base of the heart
ST segment
The ST segment, which is also known as the ST interval, is the time between the end of the QRS
complex and the start of the T wave. It reflects the period of zero potential between ventricular
depolarization and repolarization.
T wave
T waves represent ventricular repolarization (atrial repolarization is obscured by the large QRS
complex).
Wave direction and size
Since the direction of a deflection, upward or downward, is dependent on whether the electrical
activity is going towards or away from a lead, it differs according to the orientation of the lead
with respect to the heart (see Figure 5).
Figure 5
(a) A horizontal section through the chest showing the
orientation of the chest leads with respect to the chambers of
the heart. (b) In lead V1, depolarization of the interventricular
septum occurs towards the lead, thus creating an upward
deflection (more...)
The ECG trace reflects the net electrical activity at a given moment. Consequently, activity in
one direction is masked if there is more activity, eg, by a larger mass, in the other direction. For
example, the left ventricle muscle mass is much greater than the right, and therefore its
depolarization accounts for the direction of the biggest wave.
Interpreting the ECG
A normal ECG tracing is provided in Figure 6. The only way to become confident at reading
ECGs is to practice. It is important to be methodical – every ECG reading should start with an
assessment of the rate, rhythm, and axis. This approach always reveals something about an ECG,
regardless of how unusual it is.
Figure 6
Example of a normal ECG.
Rate
Identify the QRS complex (this is generally the biggest wave); count the number of large squares
between one QRS wave and the next; divide 300 by this number to determine the rate (see Table
2).
Table 2
Some common heart rates as determined by analysis of the
QRS complex.
Rhythm
P waves are the key to determining whether a patient is in sinus rhythm or not. If P waves are not
clearly visible in the chest leads, look for them in the other leads. The presence of P waves
 4/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
immediately before every QRS complex indicates sinus rhythm. If there are no P waves, note
whether the QRS complexes are wide or narrow, regular or irregular.
No P waves and irregular narrow QRS complexes
This is the hallmark of atrial fibrillation (see Figure 7). Sometimes the baseline appears "noisy"
and sometimes it appears entirely flat. However, if there are no P waves and the QRS complexes
appear at randomly irregular intervals, the diagnosis is atrial fibrillation.
Figure 7
ECG demonstrating atrial fibrillation.
Sawtooth P waves
A sawtooth waveform signifies atrial flutter (see Figure 8). The number of atrial contractions to
one ventricular contraction should be specified.
Figure 8
ECG demonstrating atrial flutter – note the characteristic
sawtooth waveform.
Axis
The axis is the net direction of electrical activity during depolarization. It is altered by left
ventricular or right ventricular hypertrophy or by bundle branch blocks. It is a very
straightforward measurement that, once it has been grasped, can be calculated instantaneously:
find the QRS complex in the I and aVF leads (because these look at the heart at 0° and
+90°, respectively)
determine the net positivity of the QRS wave from each of the two leads by subtracting the
S wave height (the number of small squares that it crosses as it dips below the baseline – if
it does) from the R wave height (the number of small squares that it crosses as it rises) (see
Figure 9a and 9b)
plot out the net sizes of these QRS waves against each other on a vector diagram (see
Figure 9c). For the I lead, plot net positives to the right and net negatives to the left; for the
aVF lead, plot positive downwards and negative upwards
the direction of the endpoint from the starting point represents the axis or predominant
direction of electrical depolarization (determined primarily by the muscle mass of the left
ventricle). It is expressed as an angle and can be estimated quite easily (normal is 0°–120°)
Figure 9
Vector diagram to determine the QRS axis.
Human Resuscitation
The first electrical resuscitation of a human took place (almost certainly) in 1872. The
resuscitation of a drowned girl with electricity is described by Guillaume Benjamin Amand
Duchenne de Boulogne, a pioneering neurophysiologist, in the third edition of his textbook
on the medical uses of electricity. Although it is sometimes described as the first artificial
pacing, the stimulation was of the phrenic nerve and not the myocardium.
 5/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
ECG abnormalities
This section discusses the most important and most frequently encountered ECG abnormalities.
Normal variations
Small Q waves and inverted T waves in lead III often disappear on deep inspiration.
Occasional septal Q waves can be seen in other leads.
ST elevation following an S wave ("high take off") is common in leads V2–V4 and is quite
normal. Differentiating this from pathological ST elevation can be difficult and relies on
the patient's history and the availability of a previous ECG. These "repolarization
abnormalities" are more common in the young and in athletes.
T-wave inversion is common in Afro-Caribbean blacks.
U waves – small extra waves following T waves – are seen in hypokalemic patients, but
can also represent a normal variant.
Ventricular extrasystoles – no P waves, broad and abnormal QRS complexes, and T waves
interspersed between normal sinus rhythm – sometimes occur and do not require further
investigation unless they are associated with symptoms (such as dizziness, palpitations,
exercise intolerance, chest pain, shortness of breath) or occur several times every minute.
Pathological variations
Long PR interval
A distance of more than five small squares from the start of the P wave to the start of the R wave
(or Q wave if there is one) constitutes first-degree heart block (see Figure 10). It rarely requires
action, but in the presence of other abnormalities might be a sign of hyperkalemia, digoxin
toxicity, or cardiomyopathy.
Figure 10
ECG demonstrating first-degree heart block.
EKG or ECG?
There is some debate over exactly who invented the electrocardiogram. The Dutch "K"
(elektrokardiogram) is often used as a tribute to the Indonesian-born physician Wilhelm
Einthoven who, while working in The Netherlands in 1924, received the Nobel prize for "the
discovery of the mechanism of the electrocardiogram". In fact, it was Augustus Désiré
Waller, a physician trained in Edinburgh, who presented – to the students of St Mary's
Hospital medical school, London, at the introductory lecture of the 1888 academic year –
his "cardiograph", the first ever ECG recording in man. It was some years later, in 1901,
that Wilhelm Einthoven reported his string galvanometer – with the limb leads labeled I, II,
and III and the waves labeled P, QRS, and T as we know them today. In fact, although often
credited with inventing the term electrocardiogram (which is why it is sometimes spelt the
Dutch way), Einthoven credits Waller with this distinction in his 1895 publication in
Pflügers Archives "Über die Form des menschlichen Elektrokardiogramms".
Q waves
 6/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
A normal ECG has only very small Q waves. A downward deflection immediately following a P
wave that is wider than two small squares or greater in height than a third of the subsequent R
wave is significant: such Q waves can represent previous infarction (see Figure 11, previous
page).
Figure 11
ECG demonstrating abnormal Q waves in V1–V4. This is
indicative of a previous infarction.
Large QRS complexes
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is one of the easiest and most useful diagnoses to make (see
Figure 12). The Sokolow–Lyon index is the most commonly calculated index of estimation. Does
the sum of the S wave in lead V1 (SV1) and the R wave in V6 (RV6) add up to more than 3.5
mV, ie, 35 small or seven big squares? If so, the patient has LVH by voltage criterion. Right
ventricular hypertrophy is indicated by a dominant R wave in V1 (ie, R wave bigger than
following S wave; Sokolow–Lyon index: R in V1 + S in V5 or V6 ≥ 1.05 mV) and right axis
deviation.
Figure 12
ECG demonstrating left ventricular hypertrophy. Note also
the T-wave inversion in leads V4–V6. This is often labeled
"strain".
Broad QRS complexes and strange-looking ECGs
A wide QRS complex despite sinus rhythm is the hallmark of bundle branch block. Left bundle
branch block (LBBB) can cause the ECG to look extremely abnormal (see Figure 13). When
faced with such an ECG – after calculating rate, rhythm, and axis – check the width of the QRS
complex. If it is more than three small squares wide, it is abnormal. Bundle branch block can
then be diagnosed by pattern recognition of the QRS complexes in the V1 and V6 leads (see
Figure 14). New LBBB can be diagnostic of myocardial infarction (MI).
Figure 13
ECG demonstrating left bundle branch block.
Figure 14
The shapes of V1 and V6 QRS complexes in left and right
bundle branch block.
ST segment changes
The ST segment extends from the end of the S wave to the start of the T wave. It should be flat or
slightly upsloping and level with the baseline. Elevation of more than two small squares in the
chest leads or one small square in the limb leads, combined with a characteristic history,
indicates the possibility of MI (see Figure 15, previous page). ST depression is diagnostic of
ischemia (see Figure 16). It is worth noting that although ST elevation can localize the lesion (eg,
anterior MI, inferior MI), ST depression cannot. Concave upwards ST elevation in all 12 leads is
diagnostic of pericarditis.
Figure 15
 7/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
ECG demonstrating anteroseptal myocardial infarction. Note the ST-segment
elevation.
Figure 16
ECG demonstrating ST-segment depression (I, V3–V6).
T waves
In a normal ECG, T waves are upright in every lead except aVR. T-wave inversion can represent
current ischemia or previous infarction (see Figure 17). In combination with LVH and ST
depression, it can represent "strain". This form of LVH carries a poor prognosis.
Figure 17
ECG demonstrating T-wave inversion.
Long QT interval
The QT interval should be less than half of the R–R interval. Calculation of the corrected QT
(QTc) is generally not necessary and usually will have been done by the ECG machine (but
beware of blindly believing any automated diagnostic system). Conditions associated with a long
QT interval are outlined in Table 3 (see Figure 18).
Table 3
Causes of a long QT interval.
Figure 18
ECG demonstrating a long QT interval.
Long QT syndrome may also be drug-induced (see Table 4, p. 32). Once this occurs, the
responsible drug needs to be discontinued.
Table 4
Drug-induced increase in the QT interval and torsade de
pointes.
Pattern combinations
Digoxin
A reverse tick ST depression is characteristic and does not indicate toxicity. Digoxin toxicity can
result in dysrhythmia.
Pulmonary embolism
Sinus tachycardia is seen in many patients with pulmonary embolism. New right bundle branch
block (RBBB) or right axis deviation with "strain" can also indicate PE. The classic S Q T is
I III III
less common.
Hyperkalemia
The absolute potassium level is less important than its rate of rise. ECG changes reflecting a
rapid rise demand immediate action (see Figures 19–21). The level of danger increases as the
 8/9

 Conquering the ECG - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
ECG changes progress. The sequence generally follows the order:
Figure 19
Hyperkalemia. Note the tall, tented T waves.
Figure 21
ECG demonstrating a sinus-wave QRS pattern.
tall, tented T waves (see Figure 19)
lengthening of the PR interval
reduction in the P-wave height
widening of the QRS complex (see Figure 20)
"sinus" wave QRS pattern (see Figure 21)
Figure 20
ECG demonstrating a widening of the QRS complex.
A sinus-wave QRS should be treated immediately with calcium chloride, whilst hyperkalemia
associated with lesser ECG changes can be treated with insulin/glucose infusion.
PQRST?
Nobody knows for sure why these letters became standard. Certainly, mathematicians used
to start lettering systems from the middle of the alphabet to avoid confusion with the
frequently used letters at the beginning. Einthoven used the letters O to X to mark the
timeline on his ECG diagrams and, of course, P is the letter that follows O. If the image of
the PQRST diagram was striking enough to be adopted by researchers as a true
representation of the underlying form, it would have been logical to continue the same
naming convention when the more advanced string galvanometer started creating ECGs a
few years later.
Further reading
1. Ashley EA, Raxwal VK, Froelicher VF. The prevalence and prognostic significance of
electrocardiographic abnormalities. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2000;25:1–72. [PubMed:
10705558]
2. Hampton JR. ECG Made Easy. London: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.
3. Rautaharju PM. A hundred years of progress in electrocardiography. 1: Early contributions
from Waller to Wilson. Can J Cardiol. 1987;3:362–74. [PubMed: 3322535]
Copyright © 2004, Remedica.
Bookshelf ID: NBK2214
 9/9
