=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "heart_-_cote_14.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:38:25.230033",
  "file_size_bytes": 2184218,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/heart_-_cote_14.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

IV
Th e Heart
SECTION
14
Essentials of Cardiology
Timothy C. Slesnick, Ralph Gertler, and CHAPTER
Wanda C. Miller-Hance
Congenital Heart Disease Evaluation of the Patient with a Cardiac Murmur
Incidence Basic Interpretation of the Pediatric
Segmental Approach to Diagnosis Electrocardiogram
Physiologic Classifi cation of Defects Essentials of Cardiac Rhythm Interpretation and
Acute Arrhythmia Management in Children
Acquired Heart Disease
Basic Rhythms
Cardiomyopathies
Conduction Disorders
Myocarditis
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease
Pacemaker Therapy in the Pediatric Age Group
Infective Endocarditis
Pacemaker Nomenclature
Kawasaki Disease
Permanent Cardiac Pacing
Cardiac Tumors
Diagnostic Modalities in Pediatric Cardiology
Heart Failure in Children
Chest Radiography
Defi nition and Pathophysiology
Barium Swallow
Etiology and Clinical Features
Echocardiography
Treatment Strategies
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Syndromes, Associations, and Systemic Disorders:
Cardiovascular Disease and Anesthetic Implications Computed Tomography
Chromosomal Syndromes Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography
Gene Deletion Syndromes Considerations in the Perioperative Care of Children
with Cardiovascular Disease
Single-Gene Defects
General Issues
Associations
Clinical Condition and Status of Prior Repair
Other Disorders
Summary
Selected Vascular Anomalies and Their Implications
for Anesthetic Care
Aberrant Subclavian Arteries
Persistent Left Superior Vena Cava to Coronary Sinus
Communication
Congenital Heart Disease adulthood has become the expectation for most congenital car-
diovascular malformations.3 At present it is estimated that there
Incidence are more than a million adults with CHD in the United States,
Estimates of the incidence of congenital heart disease (CHD) surpassing the number of children similarly aff ected for the fi rst
range from 0.3% to 1.2% in live neonates.1 Th is represents the time in history. A similar trend of an increasing number of
most common form of congenital pathology and a major cause adults with CHD, also known as “grown-up congenital heart
of mortality during the neonatal period.2 As medical, interven- disease” (or GUCH) patients, has also been reported in Canada
tional, and surgical therapies continue to improve, survival into and several European countries.4-8
293

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
Overall, a bicuspid aortic valve (Video Clip 14-1) is the most and abdominal organs) are often more diffi cult to precisely
common cardiac defect, occurring in up to 1% of the popula- defi ne.
tion.9,10 Ventricular septal defects (Video Clip 14-2) represent
the next most common congenital lesion,9,11-15 followed by Physiologic Classifi cation of Defects
secundum atrial septal defects (Video Clip 14-3).9,16 Among the Th e wide spectrum of cardiovascular pathology in the pediatric
cyanotic conditions, tetralogy of Fallot is the most common, age group presents a unique challenge to the clinician who does
aff ecting nearly 6% of children with CHD.17 In the fi rst week of not specialize in the care of these children. Even for those with
life, however, d-transposition of the great arteries is the most a focus or interest in cardiovascular disease, the range of struc-
common cause of cardiac cyanosis, because a subset of infants tural defects and the varied associated hemodynamic perturba-
with tetralogy of Fallot will either be acyanotic or mildly desatu- tions can be overwhelming.
rated at birth so that their cardiac disease will go undetected Although the segmental approach is extremely helpful in
until later in life. characterizing CHD, there are many instances when a physio-
logic classifi cation system can facilitate understanding of the
Segmental Approach to Diagnosis basic hemodynamic abnormalities common to a group of
A number of classifi cation schemes have been proposed to char- lesions, congenital or acquired, and assist in patient manage-
acterize and categorize the various congenital cardiac malfor- ment.27,28 Several pathophysiologic classifi cation schemes have
mations.18-24 Th e one known as “the segmental approach to the been proposed, including some that categorize structural defects
diagnosis of CHD” assumes a sequential, systematic analysis of into simple versus complex lesions, consider the presence or
the three major cardiac segments (atria, ventricles, and great absence of cyanosis or whether pulmonary blood fl ow is
arteries) to characterize the abnormalities in a given patient. Th e increased or decreased, and so on.29-31 Th e following classifi ca-
guiding principle of this approach is that specifi c cardiac tion approach groups pediatric heart disease into six broad cat-
chambers and vascular structures have characteristic morpho- egories according to the underlying physiology or common
logic properties that determine their identities, rather than features of the pathologies.
their positions within the body.25 An organized, systematic Volume Overload Lesions
identifi cation of all cardiac structures or segments and their Volume overload lesions are typically due to left-to-right shunt-
relationships to each other (connections or alignments between ing at the atrial, ventricular, or great artery levels. In general, if
the segments) is carried out to defi ne a given patient’s the location of the left-to-right shunt is proximal to the mitral
anatomy.26 valve (e.g., as is the case in atrial septal defects, partial anoma-
Th e initial steps to characterize the anomalies and classify a lous pulmonary venous return, or unobstructed total anomalous
child’s cardiovascular disease are to determine the cardiac posi- pulmonary venous return), right heart dilation will occur.
tion within the thorax and the situs of the thoracic and abdomi- Lesions distal to the mitral valve (e.g., ventricular septal defect,
nal organs. Th e position of the heart can be described in terms patent ductus arteriosus, truncus arteriosus) lead to left-sided
of its location within the thoracic cavity and the direction of the heart dilation. Children with atrioventricular septal defects (also
cardiac apex. For simplicity, the following approach is frequently known as atrioventricular canal defects) also fi t into this cate-
used. Th e term levocardia indicates that the heart is in the left gory. Th e magnitude of the shunt and resultant pulmonary to
. .
hemithorax, as is normally the case. Dextrocardia specifi es that systemic blood fl ow ratio (Qp : Qs) dictates the presence and
the heart is located in the right hemithorax and mesocardia that severity of the symptoms and similarly guides medical and sur-
the heart is displaced rightward but not completely in the right gical therapies. Diuretic therapy and afterload reduction are
thoracic cavity. It is important to consider that an abnormal benefi cial in controlling pulmonary overcirculation and ensur-
location of the heart within the thorax (cardiac malposition) ing adequate systemic cardiac output. Transcatheter approaches
may result from displacement of the heart by adjacent structures or surgical interventions may be required to address the primary
or underlying noncardiac malformations (e.g., diaphragmatic pathology associated with ventricular volume overload (see
hernia, lung hypoplasia, scoliosis). Th e visceral situs or sided- Chapter 20).
ness of the abdominal organs (liver and stomach) and atrial situs
Obstruction to Systemic Blood Flow
are considered independently. Th e visceral situs is classifi ed as
Lesions characterized by systemic outfl ow tract obstruction
solitus (normal arrangement of viscera; liver on the right,
include those with ductal-dependent systemic blood fl ow. Th ese
stomach on the left and single spleen on the left), inversus
range from critical aortic stenosis, severe coarctation of the
(inversion of viscera; liver on the left, stomach on the right), or
aorta, interruption of the aortic arch, and hypoplastic left heart
ambiguous (indeterminate visceral position). Abnormal arrange-
syndrome. Prostaglandin E infusion maintains ductal patency
ments or sidedness of the abdominal viscera, heart, and lungs 1
and ensures adequate systemic blood fl ow until either surgical
suggests a high likelihood of complex cardiovascular pathology.
or transcatheter intervention is performed in the fi rst few days
Th e atrial situs, atrioventricular connections, ventricular looping
of life to relieve the systemic outfl ow tract obstruction. Often,
(referring to the position of the ventricles as a result of the direc-
inotropic and/or mechanical ventilatory support is necessary.
tion of bending of the straight heart tube in early development),
Many of these infants also have signifi cantly increased pulmo-
ventriculoarterial connections, and relationship between the . .
nary blood fl ow with a high Qp : Qs ratio, requiring diuretic
great vessels are then delineated. Finally, any associated
therapy and manipulation of the systemic and pulmonary vas-
malformations are described, including number and size of
cular resistances to control blood fl ow.
septal defects if present, valvar and/or great vessel abnormali-
ties, and so on. Whereas many types of congenital defects fall Obstruction to Pulmonary Blood Flow
neatly into this classifi cation scheme, others, such as heterotaxy Lesions with pulmonary outfl ow tract obstruction include
syndromes (a condition associated with malposition of the heart those with ductal-dependent pulmonary blood fl ow. Pulmonary
294

14
Essentials of Cardiology
atresia with intact ventricular septum and critical pulmonary ventricular noncompaction37-39 and arrhythmogenic right ven-
valve stenosis are defects that rely on patency of the ductus tricular dysplasia.40 Secondary forms of cardiomyopathies are
arteriosus for pulmonary blood fl ow. Th ese infants may also those associated with neuromuscular disorders such as Duch-
require prostaglandin E infusions to manage their cyanosis enne muscular dystrophy, glycogen storage diseases (i.e., Pompe
1
until the pulmonary outfl ow tract obstruction is relieved or disease), hemochromatosis or iron overload, and mitochondrial
bypassed. disorders. In addition, chemotherapeutic agents such as anthra-
cyclines may result in dilated cardiomyopathies.41 It is important
Parallel Circulation
to understand the basic hemodynamic processes behind the
In the neonate with d-transposition of the great arteries the
myocardial disease and implications for acute and chronic
pulmonary and systemic circulations operate in parallel rather
management.
than the normal confi guration in series. In this condition, deox-
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by
ygenated blood from the right ventricle is ejected into the aorta
ventricular hypertrophy without identifi able hemodynamic eti-
and the left ventricle is in subpulmonary position ejecting oxy-
ology resulting in increased myocardial thickness. Th is is one of
genated blood into the lungs. Neonates with this lesion depend
the most common forms, accounting for nearly 40% of cardio-
on mixing of blood at the atrial, ventricular, or ductal levels.
myopathies in children.42-45 Th e condition represents a hetero-
Although an infusion of prostaglandin E can maintain ductal
1 genous group of disorders, with the majority of the identifi ed
patency, many neonates benefi t from a balloon atrial septostomy
genetic defects exhibiting autosomal dominant inheritance pat-
shortly after birth to create or enlarge an existing restrictive
terns.46,47 Th e mutations typically involve genes that encode sar-
interatrial communication and optimize mixing. Th is is because
comeric proteins. Th is type of cardiac muscle disease is the most
mixing at the atrial level is much more eff ective than either the
common cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in athletes, with
ventricular or ductal levels.
an overall incidence estimated to be approximately 1% per year,
Single-Ventricle Lesions with children and young adults aff ected most frequently.48,49
Th is category is the most heterogeneous group, consisting of Most children aff ected by HCM do not have left ventricular
defects associated with atrioventricular valve atresia (i.e., tricus- outfl ow tract obstruction (nonobstructive cardiomyopathy). It
pid atresia), heterotaxy syndromes, and many others.32 In some is unclear if the remaining minority with hypertrophic obstruc-
tive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), previously known as idiopathic
cases, both atria empty into a dominant ventricular chamber
hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (IHSS), are at an increased risk
(i.e., double-inlet left ventricle); and although a second rudimen-
tary ventricle is typically present, the physiology is that of a
of SCD as compared with children without obstruction.44
single ventricle or univentricular heart. Other cardiac malfor- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may also involve the right
mations with two distinct ventricles (i.e., unbalanced atrioven- ventricle.
tricular septal defect) may also be considered in the functional Th e diagnosis of HCM begins with a history and physical
single-ventricle category because of associated defects that may examination. Most children are identifi ed upon evaluation of a
preclude a biventricular repair. A common feature among these heart murmur, syncope, palpitations, or chest pain. Occasion-
lesions is complete mixing of the systemic and pulmonary ally, an abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG) leads to referral. An
venous blood at the atrial or ventricular level. Another frequent accurate family history is essential. A prominent apical impulse
fi nding is aortic or pulmonary outfl ow tract obstruction. Th ese is often present. Auscultation may reveal a systolic ejection
children require careful delineation of their anatomy because outfl ow murmur that becomes louder with maneuvers that
each child represents a unique challenge to the practitioner. An decrease preload or afterload (standing, Valsalva maneuver) or
important goal in single-ventricle management involves optimi- increase contractility. Th e murmur decreases in intensity with
zation of the balance between the pulmonary and systemic cir- squatting and isometric handgrip. A mitral regurgitant murmur
culations early in life. Th is relates to the fact that a low pulmonary may also be present. An ECG will meet criteria for left ventricu-
vascular resistance is an essential prerequisite for later palliative lar hypertrophy in most children (Fig. 14-1). In some, the ECG
strategies and favorable outcomes. Th ese considerations are also fi ndings may be striking (Fig. 14-2). Echocardiography demon-
relevant in the anesthetic management of these children during strating a hypertrophied nondilated left ventricle is diagnostic
noncardiac surgery.30,33,34 (Video Clip 14-4).49 In many children, the hypertrophy may be
asymmetrical (Video Clip 14-5). Echocardiography is the
Intrinsic Myocardial Disorders primary imaging modality for long-term assessment of wall
Children with primary cardiomyopathies or other forms of thickness, ventricular dimensions, presence and severity of
acquired heart disease such as myocarditis are characterized as obstruction, systolic and diastolic function, valve competence,
having heart muscle disease (see later). Th ey frequently have and response to therapy. Other diagnostic approaches such as
impaired ventricular function, either systolic or diastolic, and cardiac catheterization and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
benefi t from therapies tailored to their particular disease process. may add helpful information in some cases.
Th e care of children with HCM includes maintenance of
Acquired Heart Disease adequate preload, particularly in those with dynamic obstruc-
tion. Diuretics are generally not indicated and will often worsen
Cardiomyopathies the hemodynamic state by reducing left ventricular volume and
Th e term cardiomyopathy usually refers to diseases of the myo- increasing the outfl ow obstruction. Drugs that augment myo-
cardium associated with cardiac dysfunction.35,36 Th ese have cardial contractility (inotropic agents, calcium infusions) are not
been classifi ed into primary and secondary forms. Th e most well tolerated. Patients usually undergo continuous ECG moni-
common types in children are hypertrophic, dilated or conges- toring (Holter recording) and exercise testing for risk stratifi ca-
tive, and restrictive cardiomyopathies. Other forms include left tion.50 β blockers and calcium-channel blockers are the primary
295

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-1. ECG in adolescent female with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy demonstrating left ventricular hypertrophy (deep S wave in V
1
and tall R waves over the left precordial leads). There is ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion over the left precordial leads related
to repolarization changes associated with left ventricular hypertrophy, also known as a “strain” pattern. Reciprocal ST-segment elevation is
noted over the right precordial leads.
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-2. Tracing in a patient with Pompe disease, a severe form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy displaying dramatic right and left
ventricular voltages, as well as ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities. The recording is displayed at full standard (10 mm/mV, meaning that
the ECG was not reduced in size to fi t on the paper) as are all other ECG tracings in this chapter for reference.
296

14
Essentials of Cardiology
agents for outpatient drug therapy.51 Long-term treatment is
individualized and based on the degree of hypertrophy, presence
of ventricular ectopy, symptomatology (including syncope and
congestive heart failure), family history, and genetic mutation
analysis when available. Th erapies range widely and include
longitudinal observation with medical management of heart
failure and arrhythmias, implantation of cardioverter-defi brilla-
tors, surgical myotomy/myectomy, transcatheter alcohol septal
ablation, and cardiac transplantation. Patients with HCM are
usually restricted from participating in competitive sports
activities.50
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), also known as congestive
cardiomyopathy, is characterized by thinning of the left ven-
tricular myocardium, dilation of the ventricular cavity, and
impaired systolic function.52-54 Th ere is a broader range of
etiologies than with HCM, ranging from genetic/familial forms
with multiple types of inheritance patterns to those caused by
infections (adenovirus, coxsackievirus, human immunodefi -
ciency virus55), metabolic derangements (thyroid disorders,
mitochondrial disorders, carnitine defi ciency), toxic exposures A
(anthracyclines), and degenerative disorders (Becker and Du-
chenne muscular dystrophy).56,57 Chronic tachyarrhythmias can
also lead to DCM that may or may not improve once the rhythm
disturbance is controlled.58-60
Most children with DCM present with signs and symptoms
of congestive heart failure (tachypnea, tachycardia, gallop
rhythm, diminished pulses, hepatomegaly). Th e chest radio-
graph typically demonstrates cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular
congestion, and, in some cases, atelectasis (Fig. 14-3). An ECG
may identify the likely cause of the cardiac dysfunction in those
with cardiomyopathy secondary to rhythm disorders or anoma-
lous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary root.
Th e echocardiogram is essential for diagnosis and characteristi-
cally demonstrates a dilated left ventricle and systolic functional
impairment (reduced shortening fraction and ejection fraction)
(Video Clip 14-6).61 Th erapy in the short term is supportive and
aimed at stabilization by controlling congestive heart failure and
ventricular dysfunction. Management may include inotropic
support (including phosphodiesterase inhibition) and mechani-
cal ventilation. Unlike children with HCM, those with DCM
have a volume-loaded, poorly contractile ventricle(s); therefore,
gentle diuresis is benefi cial. Th e infusion of large fl uid boluses
B
might be poorly tolerated and result in hemodynamic decom-
pensation and cardiovascular collapse. Th e outcome of children
with dilated cardiomyopathy is variable. In most, recovery of left Figure 14-3. Chest radiographs in a young child with dilated
ventricular systolic function occurs; however, others eventually cardiomyopathy in the posteroanterior (A) and lateral (B) projec-
require cardiac transplantation.62 In a subset of children with tions demonstrating moderate to severe cardiomegaly and
severe disease, mechanical circulatory support may be neces- pulmonary vascular congestion. The lateral fi lm shows the heart
sary as a bridge to recovery or cardiac transplantation (Fig. 14-4, bulging anteriorly against the sternum.
see Chapter 19).63-65 Once initial stabilization is achieved, the
treatment strategy typically switches to β blockade and afterload
reduction with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is the least common of syncopal or near sudden death event. Th e physical examination
the major subsets of cardiomyopathies (5%) and portends a may demonstrate hepatomegaly, peripheral edema, and
worse prognosis when it presents during childhood (survival ascites.
<50% at 2 years from diagnosis).66-71 Th e disorder is character- Th e echocardiographic hallmark of RCM is that of severe
ized by diastolic dysfunction related to a marked increase in atrial dilation (due to elevated atrial pressures) associated with
myocardial stiff ness resulting in impaired ventricular fi lling. normal- to small-sized ventricles (Video Clip 14-7). Th e marked
Most cases are thought to be idiopathic. Th e presenting symp- diastolic dysfunction leads to increased end-diastolic pressures,
toms are generally nonspecifi c and primarily relate to the respi- left atrial hypertension, and secondary pulmonary hyper-
ratory system. Occasionally the diagnosis is made following a tension. Children with RCM are prone to thromboembolic
297

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
Flow probe
Inlet cannula
Pump
A B
Figure 14-4. Mechanical circulatory assist devices. A, Chest radiograph in a child with end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy after placement of
a MicroMed/DeBakey Child ventricular assist device for circulatory support while awaiting cardiac transplantation. This miniaturized device
includes a titanium pump, inlet cannula (placed in the left ventricle), percutaneous cable, fl ow probe and outfl ow graft (placed in the aorta,
not radiopaque). B, The Berlin Heart ventricular assist device. This device allows for paracorporeal placement and circulatory support in
infants and small children. Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the device has been used under specifi c
guidelines and is available in several European countries.
complications, and anticoagulation therapy is frequently recom- myocyte damage in myocardial infl ammatory diseases is quite
mended. Th is is an important consideration during periopera- complex.
tive care as adjustments in the anticoagulation regimen may be Th e overall incidence of myocarditis is not known because it
necessary. Atrial and ventricular tachyarrhythmias may also is frequently underdiagnosed, going unrecognized as a nonspe-
occur. Optimal medical treatment is controversial because no cifi c viral syndrome. A large 10-year population-based study on
specifi c agents or strategies have been shown to signifi cantly cardiomyopathy found an annual incidence of 1.24 per 100,000
alter outcomes.71 Similar to children with HCM, diuretics often children younger than 10 years of age, only a fraction of which
cause a decrease in the needed preload with detrimental eff ects represented those with myocarditis.77 Th e diagnosis is made
on hemodynamics. Inotropic agents are not benefi cial because utilizing clinical history, physical examination, and imaging
systolic function is typically preserved and the arrhythmogenic modalities. A child with new-onset congestive heart failure or
properties of inotropic drugs can induce a terminal event. In many ventricular arrhythmias without evidence of structural heart
centers cardiac transplantation has been eff ectively utilized.72,73 disease should be considered to have myocarditis until proven
otherwise. An ECG will typically demonstrate low-voltage QRS
Myocarditis complexes with tachycardia, sometimes ventricular in origin.
Myocarditis is defi ned as infl ammation of the myocardium, Chest radiography often shows cardiomegaly with pulmonary
often associated with necrosis and myocyte degeneration. In the vascular congestion (Fig. 14-5). Echocardiography reveals
United States it is most often caused by a viral infection. Over dilated ventricles with impaired systolic function, similar to
the past 20 years the spectrum of viral pathogens causing myo- dilated cardiomyopathy, and is useful in the exclusion of alterna-
carditis has changed, such that adenovirus, enteroviruses (i.e., tive diagnoses, such as pericardial eff usion or anomalous origin
coxsackievirus B), and parvovirus have become the most of a coronary artery, which can present in a similar manner.
frequent causes of fulminant disease.74-76 Th e pathogenesis of Myocarditis is generally a clinical diagnosis, because defi nitive
298

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Rheumatic fever results from infection by particular strains
of group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus or Streptococcus pyogenes.
Both cellular and humoral immune responses to the bacterial
antigens cross react with native tissues to result in a multisys-
temic infl ammatory disorder. Th e incubation period for most
strains of group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus is typically 3 to 5
days, although some children will present with a more remote
history of pharyngitis.
Th e diagnosis of rheumatic fever is made clinically based on
the modifi ed Jones criteria.96 Major criteria include carditis,
polyarthritis, chorea, subcutaneous nodules, and erythema
marginatum. Evidence of a prior streptococcal infection
along with two major or one major and two minor criteria
are required to make the diagnosis in children without prior
history of rheumatic fever or echocardiographic evidence of
typical valvular involvement. Fever and arthritis are common
symptoms. Th e polyarthritis has a migratory pattern, typically
aff ecting large joints. Cardiac involvement or carditis occurs
in nearly 50% of children with their fi rst attack of rheumatic
fever. Rheumatic heart disease represents a sequela of the
Figure 14-5. Chest radiograph in a child with acute myocarditis.
acute process, aff ecting the mitral and aortic valves most
Note the severe cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascularity.
frequently.
Primary prevention of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart
disease begins with prompt recognition and appropriate treat-
ment of the initial streptococcal infection.97,98 Secondary pre-
confi rmation requires the analysis of tissue obtained through vention, with ongoing therapy in individuals with a known
myocardial biopsy either in the catheterization laboratory or the history of rheumatic fever, has been shown to be extremely
operating room (rarely performed).78 eff ective at preventing recurrent attacks. Although there is some
Many children with myocarditis have subclinical or mild debate regarding the optimal regimen, intramuscular injections
clinical disease, whereas others progress to overt heart failure of benzathine penicillin every 3 to 4 weeks appear to be most
and/or arrhythmias. Among children with overt heart failure, effi cacious.99
approximately one third will regain full ventricular function, one Finally, in a subset of children with severe cardiac involve-
third will recover but continue to demonstrate impaired systolic ment, elective or emergent surgery plays an important role.100
function, and one third will require cardiac transplantation.79,80 Valvular disease, rather than global myocarditis, is often the
A subset of children, not all of whom initially manifest severe cause of congestive heart failure symptoms; and medical man-
symptoms in the acute period, will progress to develop DCM. agement is, therefore, limited in effi cacy. When possible, valve
Although no specifi c therapies have been identifi ed to directly repair rather than replacement is preferred.
treat the myocardial injury, a variety of strategies have been
employed.81-84 In the past, aggressive inotropic support was used Infective Endocarditis
to maintain cardiac output, perfuse vital organs, and prevent Children with structural or acquired heart disease are at risk for
metabolic complications. However, increasing inotropy con- developing infective endocarditis.101,102 Th e risk varies from neg-
comitantly increases myocardial oxygen demand and can have ligible to signifi cant depending on a number of factors but to a
detrimental eff ects. Th e paradigm has therefore shifted toward great extent is based on the nature of the cardiac condition. Th e
diuresis and gentle inotropic support, often with agents such as infection results from deposition of bacteria or other pathogens
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (milrinone), to improve myocar- on tissues in areas of abnormal or turbulent blood fl ow. Th e
dial performance without placing a large burden on an already diagnosis of endocarditis is made clinically by applying the
failing heart.81 Rhythm disturbances should be treated appropri- modifi ed Duke criteria.103, 104 Major criteria include demonstra-
ately. Th erapy with immune modulation or suppression with tion of microorganisms and evidence of pathologic lesions. Th e
intravenous immunoglobulin is the standard of care at many presentation of the disease may be acute or subacute. New or
centers.80,85-87 Mechanical circulatory support may also be changing heart murmurs may indicate the development of
required in fulminant disease.88-93 either regurgitation or obstruction on an aff ected valve. Among
the physical fi ndings in children with endocarditis (part of the
Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease minor criteria) are signs of systemic embolization. Splinter hem-
Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease are leading orrhages (linear streaks under the nail beds), Janeway lesions
causes of acquired cardiac disease in developing countries, with (painless macules on the hands or feet), Osler nodes (small,
between 5 and 30 million children and young adults aff ected painful nodules on the fi ngers), and Roth spots (retinal hemor-
worldwide and a mortality rate of 1% to 10%.94 In the United rhages with clear centers) may be present. Infl ammatory
States, the availability of antibiotics to treat streptococcal phar- markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive
yngitis has markedly reduced the incidence of this disease but protein levels, are typically elevated, albeit nonspecifi c. Micro-
sporadic cases still occur.95 In children, the peak incidence scopic hematuria, as a manifestation of renal involvement, is
occurs between 5 and 14 years of age. frequently seen.
299

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
Acute bacterial endocarditis is caused most commonly by disposition to the acquisition of endocarditis. Th e recently pub-
Staphylococcus aureus.105,106 Such individuals typically present lished guidelines no longer recommend prophylaxis based
with high fevers, chills, myalgias, fatigue, and lethargy and exclusively on an increased lifetime risk of endocarditis but
sometimes are critically ill or in shock. Unlike in the adult popu- propose that antibiotic prophylaxis should be restricted to those
lation in whom right-sided heart endocarditis occurs predomi- with the highest risk of an adverse outcome resulting from
nantly in the context of intravenous drug abuse, both left- and endocarditis. Patients in this category include those with pros-
right-sided endocarditis can occur in children with CHD.107 Fur- thetic cardiac valves, previous history of endocarditis, certain
thermore, children with indwelling venous catheters have an congenital heart defects/post specifi c interventions, and cardiac
expanded spectrum of pathogens known to cause acute endo- transplant recipients with valvular disease (Table 14-1).111
carditis, including coagulase-negative staphylococcal species or Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for these individu-
other nonbacterial organisms. als when undergoing dental procedures that involve the gingival
Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), on the other hand, tissues or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the oral
often has a more indolent course and presentation. Children mucosa. Although a number of respiratory tract procedures are
generally manifest low-grade fevers, malaise, anemia, and associated with transient bacteremia, no defi nitive data demon-
fatigue. Most frequently the Streptococcus viridans group or strate a cause-and-eff ect relationship between these procedures
Enterococcus species are the underlying pathogen. and endocarditis. Consideration may be given for high-risk
Initial evaluation of a child suspected of having bacterial patients undergoing invasive procedures of the respiratory tract
endocarditis includes serial blood cultures drawn from separate that involve incision or biopsy of the mucosa. In contrast to
sites before initiation of antimicrobial drug therapy. Th e tempo- prior guidelines, routine prophylactic administration of antibi-
ral frequency of these cultures depends on the clinical scenario otics solely to prevent endocarditis is not recommended for
and stability of the child. It is important to consider that even those undergoing genitourinary or gastrointestinal tract proce-
with excellent blood culture techniques up to 20% of children dures. However, for specifi c clinical scenarios antibiotic prophy-
with evidence of endocarditis are culture negative and require laxis may be considered in these patients. Transesophageal
empirical treatment throughout. Transthoracic echocardiogra- echocardiography or routine endoscopy does not merit routine
phy is routinely performed to evaluate for evidence of vegeta- prophylaxis.112 Prophylaxis is not considered necessary for
tions or other abnormalities.108 While visualization of a routine hemodynamic cardiac catheterization with angiogra-
vegetation establishes the diagnosis, a negative study does not phy; and although many practitioners administer routine anti-
exclude the diagnosis, so that, depending on the clinical index biotics when transcatheter placement of an intracardiac device
of suspicion, further imaging including transesophageal echo- is undertaken, there are presently insuffi cient data to support
cardiography may be necessary (Video Clip 14-8).109 Th ese this practice.113
imaging modalities are also particularly helpful during
follow-up.
Parenteral antibiotics are initiated after blood cultures have
been obtained. Broad-spectrum agents are used initially, and Table 14-1. Cardiac Conditions Associated with the Highest
once a pathogen has been identifi ed the antibiotic regimen is Risk of Adverse Outcome from Endocarditis
narrowed.101 Daily blood cultures are obtained until three con-
• Prosthetic cardiac valve
secutive cultures remain sterile. A prolonged course of therapy
• Previous infective endocarditis
is required in all children.
• Congenital heart disease (CHD)*
In addition to medical therapy, some children require surgical
intervention. Failure of medical therapy (inability to clear the Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts and
bacteremia), abscess formation, refractory heart failure, or conduits
serious embolic phenomenon are all indications for surgical Completely repaired congenital heart defect with prosthetic
intervention. Typically, the procedures involve resection of a material or device, whether placed by surgery or by catheter
vegetation, tissue debridement, and/or repair of consequent intervention, during the fi rst 6 months after the procedure†
cardiac abnormalities. Th ese children should subsequently Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent to
receive antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis prior to at-risk the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device (which
procedures (see later). inhibit endothelialization)
A high level of suspicion for endocarditis must be maintained • Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac
when evaluating a child with known heart disease and either valvulopathy
persistent bacteremia (or fungemia) or fever of unknown origin.
*Except for the conditions listed above, antibiotic prophylaxis is no
Th e same holds true for any child with foreign material in the
longer recommended for any other form of CHD.
heart or vascular tissue, such as indwelling central venous cath- †Prophylaxis is recommended because endothelialization of prosthetic
eters, pacemaker/defi brillators, and closure devices.110 material occurs within 6 months after the procedure.
Adapted with permission from Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al
Endocarditis Prophylaxis (eds): Prevention of Infective Endocarditis: Guidelines from the American
Transient bacteremia may result from disruption of mucous Heart Association. A Guideline from the American Heart Association
membranes or infected tissue during dental, surgical, or instru- Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee,
mentation procedures, causing seeding of the bloodstream with Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on
Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia,
bacteria. In children with normal intracardiac anatomy, the risk
and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary
for developing endocarditis from transient bacteremia is
Working Group. Circulation 2007; 116:1736-1754.
extremely low. However, certain cardiac conditions have a pre-
300

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Th e guidelines are to administer antibiotic prophylaxis 30 to
60 minutes preceding the procedure to achieve adequate tissue
levels before the time of potential bacteremia (Table 14-2).111
Th e standard prophylactic regimen for children is for oral amox-
icillin, 50 mg/kg dose (maximum of 2 g). For those allergic to
penicillins or ampicillin the following oral drug choices are
available: cephalexin, clindamycin, azithromycin, or clarithro-
mycin. In children unable to take oral medication, options
include ampicillin, cefazolin, or ceftriaxone via the intravenous
or intramuscular routes. In those allergic to penicillins or ampi-
cillin and unable to take oral medications, cefazolin, ceftriaxone,
or clindamycin may be used.
Kawasaki Disease Figure 14-6. MR image in the axial plane at the level of the great
Kawasaki disease was fi rst described in 1967 as mucocutaneous vessels in a child with Kawasaki disease demonstrating a large
lymph node syndrome.114 It represents a fairly common and fusiform aneurysm involving the left main coronary artery (arrow).
potentially fatal form of systemic vasculitis.115-117 Th e etiology of
Kawasaki disease remains unknown.118 It occurs predominantly
in infants and young children, most frequently in those of Asian
origin, with the lowest incidence in whites. Th e disease has a Nonspecifi c fi ndings may include irritability, hydrops of the
predilection for the coronary arteries and may lead to dilation gallbladder, sterile pyuria, arthritis, and aseptic meningitis.
and aneurysm formation.119,120 Acute-phase reactants and thrombocytosis are usually
Th e diagnosis rests on clinical features, because there are no present.
specifi c laboratory tests for Kawasaki disease. To meet criteria, Intravenous gamma globulin is usually administered during
a child must have persisting fevers and at least four of the fol- the acute phase of the disease, in addition to high doses of
lowing fi ndings121,122: aspirin, which are then decreased to lower doses for several
● Polymorphous exanthem months. Th e presence of coronary artery aneurysms is consid-
● Peripheral extremity changes (including erythema, desqua- ered diagnostic of Kawasaki disease (Fig. 14-6). Coronary artery
mation, and edema of the hands or feet) aneurysms or ectasia occur in 15% to 25% of untreated children
● Bilateral nonexudative conjunctivitis and less than 5% of those who receive intravenous gamma glob-
● Cervical lymphadenopathy (often unilateral) ulin within the fi rst 10 days of their illness.122 In children with
● Oral changes (strawberry tongue; red, dry, or cracked coronary artery aneurysms low-dose aspirin therapy is contin-
lips) ued, in some cases in combination with anticoagulants or
Table 14-2. American Heart Association Guidelines for the Prevention of Infective Endocarditis: Antibiotic Regimens
Dose (single dose 30 to 60 min
before procedure)
Situation Antibiotic Children** Adults
• Able to take oral medication Amoxicillin 50 mg/kg 2 g
• Unable to take oral medication Ampicillin 50 mg/kg IM or IV 2 g IM or IV
or
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg IM or IV 1 g IM or IV
• Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin and able Cephalexin*† 50 mg/kg 2 g
to take oral medication or
Clindamycin 20 mg/kg 600 mg
or
Azithromycin or clarithromycin 15 mg/kg 500 mg
• Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin and Cefazolin or ceftriaxone† 50 mg/kg IM or IV 1 g IM or IV
unable to take oral medication or
Clindamycin 20 mg/kg IM or IV 600 mg IM or IV
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
**Total pediatric dose not to exceed adult dose.
*Or other fi rst- or second-generation oral cephalosporin in equivalent pediatric or adult dosage.
†Cephalosporins should not be used in an individual with a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillins or ampicillin.
Adapted with permission from Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, et al (eds): Prevention of Infective Endocarditis: Guidelines from the American Heart
Association. A Guideline From the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes
Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Circulation 2007; 116:1736-1754.
301

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
antiplatelet drugs.123 Myocardial ischemia and infarction, Th e defi nition of heart failure has evolved over the years. It
although infrequent, are important potential complications in is considered not only a pump failure but also a circulatory
children with coronary artery involvement.120,124 Anesthetic care failure involving neurohumoral aspects of the circulation.145 A
thus requires careful considerations regarding myocardial number of conditions may ultimately compromise the ability to
oxygen demand and supply; on rare occasion coronary revascu- generate an adequate cardiac output to meet the systemic cir-
larization may be necessary. culatory demands. It is important to recognize that heart failure
does not necessarily imply impairment of ventricular systolic
Cardiac Tumors function but that diastolic heart failure is now an increasingly
In children, cardiac tumors in general are extremely rare, and recognized clinical entity.
thus the natural history and optimal treatment strategies are
often determined from limited case series.125-127 Unlike adults, Etiology and Clinical Features
in whom atrial myxomas represent more than 90% of cardiac Causes of heart failure diff er with age. In the perinatal period,
tumors, in children they tend to be either rhabdomyomas cardiac dysfunction is typically related to birth asphyxia or
or fi bromas.128 Less common types include hemangiomas, sepsis or may represent an early presentation of CHD. Th e
myxomas (Video Clip 14-9), Purkinje cell tumors, and terato- neonate with heart failure typically presents with clinical signs
mas. Whereas in adults, most tumors are found in the left of a low-cardiac output state. Causes include left-sided outfl ow
atrium, cardiac tumors in children occur in all four cardiac obstruction (as in aortic stenosis, aortic coarctation, hypoplastic
chambers. Malignant primary tumors are extremely rare, and left heart syndrome), severe valve regurgitation (as seen in
data on their outcomes are even more limited. Ebstein anomaly), or absent pulmonary valve syndrome.
Rhabdomyomas are the most common primary cardiac During the fi rst year of life most cases of heart failure are
tumors in children. Th ey often involve the ventricular septum caused by structural heart disease. Other causes of heart
and left ventricle and are multiple in the majority of cases.129 failure are cardiomyopathies secondary to inborn errors of
Although they are considered benign, children may present with metabolism or acute events such as myocarditis. In infants
cardiomegaly, congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, or sudden with heart failure, tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, as well as
death. Th e signifi cance of a rhabdomyoma is determined largely feeding diffi culties and failure to thrive are prominent symp-
by its size and any obstruction it may cause. Many tumors toms.146 Th e physical examination is characterized by grunting
regress over time or completely resolve; thus, surgery is respirations, rales, intercostal retractions, a gallop rhythm, and
not indicated unless symptoms are present.130,131 Many children hepatosplenomegaly. Frequently, a mitral regurgitant murmur is
with cardiac rhabdomyomas have associated tuberous present.
sclerosis.132,133 Beyond the fi rst year of life, heart failure is either a conse-
Cardiac fi bromas are the second most common type of pedi- quence of previous surgical interventions, unpalliated/unre-
atric primary cardiac tumors.134 Th ey are typically single and paired cardiovascular disease, cardiomyopathies, myocarditis,
involve the ventricular free wall. In a subset of fi bromas, the or anthracycline therapy for a malignancy. Occasionally, a child
tumor will invade the conduction system causing atrioventricu- may present with severe ventricular systolic impairment related
lar nodal disease or arrhythmias.135 Surgery or cardiac trans- to ongoing myocardial ischemia as a result of a coronary artery
plantation may be required in some cases.136,137 Th e tumors may anomaly or rarely due to acquired pathologies such as Kawasaki
be very large, so that complete surgical resection may result in disease. Older children with heart failure exhibit exercise intol-
severely depressed cardiac function. Partial resections have erance, fatigue, and growth failure, whereas adolescents have
been found to result in an arrest in growth with good outcomes symptoms similar to adults.
while sparing cardiac function.131 Th e primary concern in the
perioperative care of children with cardiac tumors relates to the Treatment Strategies
impact of the mass on hemodynamics (i.e., ventricular fi lling, Th erapy is tailored to the etiology of the cardiac dysfunction and
patency of outfl ow tracts) and associated abnormalities of may include supportive care, mechanical ventilation, inotropic
cardiac rhythm.138 support, afterload reduction, prostaglandin E therapy to main-
1
tain pulmonary or systemic blood fl ow, maneuvers to balance
Heart Failure in Children the systemic and pulmonary circulations, catheter-based inter-
ventions, or surgery.147-151 Maintaining organ perfusion is the
Defi nition and Pathophysiology main goal in acute heart failure therapy. Th e primary therapeu-
Over the last several decades heart failure has been a major fi eld tic agents include catecholamines and inodilators. If the cause
of interest and investigation in adult medicine. Although this of the heart failure is not correctable, treatment consists of the
entity is less common in children, the interest in heart failure standard drug regimen for chronic heart failure (diuretic therapy,
has been the subject of various publications,139 scientifi c meet- β blockade, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition).152,153
ings, and the focus of several textbooks.140,141 It is important to Newer agents that have received increasing attention in the
emphasize that pediatric heart failure results from markedly management of pediatric heart failure include nesiritide (a
diff erent causes than those reported in adults.142 Understanding recombinant form of human B-type natriuretic peptide)154-156
the cellular basis of heart failure in children, compensatory and carvedilol (a third-generation β blocker).157-159 For all ages,
mechanisms, and therapeutic advances in this area are now at nutrition requires particular attention, because the work of
the forefront of pediatric medicine.139-141,143,144 Th e discussion breathing causes high caloric demands in the setting of fl uid
that follows highlights a few of the key concepts as they relate restriction and often inadequate intake; hypercaloric nutrition
to anesthetic practice. through an enteral feeding tube may be required.
302

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Syndromes, Associations, and Systemic 1 in 3500 newborns). Most patients exhibit microcephaly,
delayed psychomotor development, and mental retardation.170
Disorders: Cardiovascular Disease and
Characteristic craniofacial features include micrognathia or ret-
Anesthetic Implications rognathia, microstomia, malformed ears, and microphthal-
mia.171 Th ese abnormalities may aff ect airway management.172,173
A wide variety of disorders including those resulting from chro- Skeletal anomalies include clenched fi ngers and severe growth
mosomal abnormalities, single-gene defects, gene deletion syn- retardation. Neurologic abnormalities are characterized by
dromes, as well as known associations (nonrandom occurrence developmental delay, hypotonia, and central nervous system
of defects), and teratogenic exposure may manifest as cardiovas- malformations. Th e high mortality rate in children with trisomy
cular disease. Th e coexistence of frequently associated multiple 18 is usually related to the presence of cardiac and renal prob-
organ system comorbidities with cardiovascular disease pres- lems, feeding diffi culties, sepsis, and apnea caused by neurologic
ents a number of challenges to the anesthesia care provider. abnormalities.
Cardiovascular disease is present in most children and con-
Chromosomal Syndromes sists primarily of ventricular septal defects and polyvalvular
disease.174,175 Implications for anesthetic care include the high
Down Syndrome
incidence of congestive heart failure and aspiration pneumo-
Down syndrome is the most frequent chromosomal aberration,
nia.173 Th ese children may require interventions to address asso-
occurring with a frequency of 1 in 800 living births. Th e inci-
ciated gastrointestinal or genitourinary anomalies.
dence increases sharply with advanced maternal age. In most
children, it is the result of trisomy 21 but it may occur from bal-
Trisomy 13
anced or unbalanced translocations of chromosome 21 or mosa-
Trisomy 13, an uncommon autosomal trisomy, is also known as
icism. Th e phenotypes are indistinguishable. In general, these
Patau syndrome. Th e incidence of this chromosomal disorder
children are typically smaller than normal for age and craniofa-
ranges from 1 in 5,000 to 12,000 live births. Major features of
cial features include microbrachycephaly, short neck, oblique
this syndrome include cleft lip and palate, holoprosencephaly,
palpebral fi ssures, epicanthal folds, Brushfi eld’s spots, small low-
polydactyly, rocker-bottom feet, microphthalmia, microcephaly,
set ears, macroglossia, and microdontia with fused teeth. Man-
and severe mental retardation.176,177 Nearly all children have
dibular hypoplasia and a broad fl at nose are typical. A narrow
associated cardiovascular defects that include patent ductus
nasopharynx with hypertrophic lymphatic tissue (tonsils, ade-
arteriosus, septal defects, valve abnormalities, and dextrocar-
noids), in combination with generalized hypotonia, frequently
dia.175 Th e overall prognosis for children with this syndrome is
leads to sleep apnea. Other conditions that aff ect these children
extremely poor.
include mental retardation, cervical spine disorders with verte-
bral and ligamentous instability, thyroid disease, leukemia, Turner Syndrome
obesity, subglottic stenosis,160 and gastrointestinal problems. Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder (estimated incidence of
Airway issues include the potential for upper airway obstruc- 1 in 5,000 liveborn female infants) characterized by partial or
tion due to the presence of a prominent tongue, postextubation complete X chromosome monosomy.178 Th ere is a high degree
stridor,161 and cervical spine injury.162-164 Vascular access can be of spontaneous abortion among aff ected fetuses. Features of this
diffi cult. Subjectively, there is an impression that these children syndrome include webbed neck, low-set ears, multiple pig-
have small vessel sizes, vascular hyperreactivity, and fragile mented nevi and micrognathia, lymphedema, short stature, and
tissue consistency and may suff er from more complications after ovarian failure.179 Systemic manifestations include cardiac
arterial cannulation. defects (notably aortic coarctation and bicuspid aortic valve),
Cardiovascular defects occur in 40% to 50% of children, so it hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, renal anomalies, liver
has been recommended that all children undergo screening for disease, and infl ammatory bowel disease. Obesity is common in
CHD in early infancy.165,166 Th e most common lesions include older children as well as a high incidence of endocrinologic
atrioventricular septal defects (Video Clip 14-10), ventricular abnormalities such as hypothyroidism and diabetes.178,180 Renal
septal defects, tetralogy of Fallot, and patent ductus arteriosus. anomalies occur in up to one third of children.
Pathology after repair of atrioventricular septal defects is most
often related to mitral regurgitation, left ventricular outfl ow Gene Deletion Syndromes
tract obstruction, residual intracardiac shunts, and, rarely, mitral
Williams Syndrome
stenosis. Bradycardia under anesthesia occurs commonly.167
Williams syndrome is a congenital disorder with an incidence
Pulmonary hypertension resulting from either the cardiac
of 1 in 20,000 live births. Th e genetic abnormality responsible
pathology or from chronic hypoxemia secondary to upper
for this syndrome in the majority of cases is a chromosomal
airway obstruction should be considered in the management of
deletion on the long arm of chromosome 7, altering the elastin
these children.168 Reduced nitric oxide bioavailability has been
gene.181,182 Th e absence of this gene is detected by fl uorescent
reported, leading to endothelial cell dysfunction,169 possibly
in-situ hybridization (FISH). Features of Williams syndrome
explaining the increased pulmonary vascular reactivity in these
include characteristic elfi n facies, outgoing personality, endo-
children with an early and higher incidence of pulmonary
crine abnormalities (including hypercalcemia and hypothy-
obstructive disease, even after corrective cardiac surgery.
roidism), mental retardation, growth defi ciency, and altered
Trisomy 18 neurodevelopment. Associated cardiovascular pathology
Also known as Edwards syndrome, trisomy 18 is recognized as includes valvar and supravalvular aortic stenosis (Fig. 14-7) and
the second most common chromosomal trisomy (incidence of coarctation of the aorta.183,184 Th e arteriopathy found in these
303

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
is overwhelmingly associated with the deletion, it should be
considered in any child with a conotruncal anomaly, neonatal
hypocalcemia, or any of the less common features when seen in
association with dysmorphic facial features.
Cardiac anomalies are often described as conotruncal anom-
alies; however, outfl ow tract anomalies are also frequently
seen.191 Th e remainder of the cardiac defects crosses an enor-
Asc Ao
mous spectrum, ranging from hypoplastic left ventricle to vas-
cular rings. Only a minority of children with this chromosomal
Ao V
deletion have a normal cardiovascular system. Th e immune
system is aff ected in a signifi cant number of children. As a con-
sequence of thymic hypoplasia, children typically have dimin-
ished T-cell numbers and function. Th e immunodefi ciency
requires the use of irradiated blood products and strict aseptic
precautions during vascular access. Neurodevelopmental fea-
tures include primarily speech delay as well as attention-defi cit
disorders. Psychiatric disorders are well described in these
individuals.192
Single-Gene Defects
Noonan Syndrome
Noonan syndrome, an autosomal dominant syndrome, occurs
Figure 14-7. Echocardiogram displaying the classic supravalvar
with a frequency of 1 in 1,000 to 2,500 livebirths. It is character-
aortic narrowing in a patient with Williams syndrome (arrows). Ao
ized by distinctive dysmorphic features that include neck
V, aortic valve; Asc Ao, ascending aorta.
webbing, low-set ears, chest deformities, hypertelorism, and
short stature.193 Some male children also have cryptorchidism.
Th e diagnosis of Noonan syndrome depends primarily on clini-
children may also involve the origin of the coronary arteries or cal features.194 In neonates, the facial features may be less appar-
other systemic and pulmonary vessels. Diff use narrowing of the ent; however, generalized edema and excess nuchal folds may
abdominal aorta may occur in association with renal artery be present as are seen in Turner syndrome. Th e facial features
stenosis. are more diffi cult to detect in later adolescence and adulthood.
Several reports in the literature have described unanticipated Th e disorder is associated with a high incidence of CHD
events during anesthetic care in these children.185-187 Two condi- (~50%), with pulmonary valve dysplasia/stenosis being the most
tions may result in increased anesthetic morbidity and the common.195 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may develop during
potential for mortality: coronary artery stenosis leading to myo- the fi rst few years of life (in 10% to 20% of patients).196 Clinical
cardial ischemia and severe biventricular outfl ow tract obstruc- problems may also include developmental delay and bleeding
tion. Because the extent of the disease in the aff ected individual diathesis (von Willebrand disease, factors XI and XII defi ciency,
is variable and may have devastating implications, a thorough and thrombocytopenia).197
cardiac evaluation is advisable in all children.188 On occasion,
Marfan Syndrome
children may require further evaluation before undergoing
Marfan syndrome is a multisystem disorder with variable
anesthetic care.
expression resulting from a mutation in the fi brillin gene, a con-
Children with Williams syndrome may exhibit some degree
nective tissue protein.198 It is estimated that about 1 in 10,000
of muscular weakness; thus, the cautious use and application of
individuals in the United States is aff ected by this syndrome.
muscle relaxants has been suggested.188 Associated neurodevel-
Clinical manifestations typically involve the cardiovascular, skel-
opmental delay, attention-defi cit disorder, and autistic behavior
etal, and ocular systems.199,200 Cardiovascular pathology includes
often requires adequate premedication. A high prevalence of
mitral valve prolapse and regurgitation, ascending aortic dila-
subclinical hypothyroidism has been reported in these chil-
tion (Fig. 14-8), and main pulmonary artery dilatation. Dilata-
dren.189 Renal manifestations include renovascular hyper-
tion of the sinuses of Valsalva is found in 60% to 80% of adults.
tension, reduced function, and hypercalcemia-induced
Th e risk of aortic dissection rises considerably with increasing
nephrocalcinosis.
aortic size but may occur at any point in the course of the
Chromosome 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome: DiGeorge and disease.201 Cardiac arrhythmias may be related to valvular heart
Velocardiofacial Syndrome disease, cardiomyopathy, and/or congestive heart failure.
Th e 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, with an estimated incidence of β-blocker therapy and aggressive blood pressure control has
approximately 1 in 3,000, encompasses DiGeorge, conotruncal been the standard of care in patients with aortic root dilation202
face, and velocardiofacial syndromes. It is also known as CATCH and should be continued perioperatively. Aortic root replace-
22 syndrome: an acronym for cardiac defects, abnormal facies, ment in Marfan syndrome has been associated with a greater
thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate, and hypocalcemia, all of which risk of re-dissection and recurrent aneurysm when compared
are commonly present.190 Cardiac malformations, speech delay, with other patients who have undergone similar interventions.203
and immunodefi ciency are the most common features of the Th erefore, it is wise to maintain hemodynamics near baseline
chromosome 22q deletion syndromes. Because no single feature values during anesthetic care even in the postoperative period.
304

14
Essentials of Cardiology
of life. Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fi stula is found
in a large number of aff ected infants. Low birth weight (<1500 g)
and associated cardiac pathology have been identifi ed to be
independent predictors of mortality in infants undergoing
surgery for esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fi stula (see
Chapter 36). Th e presence of a ductal-dependent cardiac lesion
further increases perioperative morbidity and mortality.209 Limb
defects occur in most children and include absent or displaced
thumbs, polydactyly, syndactyly, and forearm abnormalities.
Th ese may impact vascular access and monitor placement.
Renal defects are noted in approximately 50% of children.
CHARGE Association
CHARGE association is characterized by congenital anomalies
that include coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, retarda-
tion of growth and development, genitourinary problems, and
ear abnormalities. Th e association is estimated to occur in
approximately 1 in 10,000 to 12,000 live births. Th e etiology is
unknown, but it has been suggested that defi ciency in migration
of neural crest cells, defi ciency of mesodermal formation, or
defective interaction between neural crest cells and mesoderm
play a part in these defects of blastogenesis.210,211 Specifi c
genetic abnormalities have also been identifi ed in some
Figure 14-8. Dilated aortic root as displayed by MRI in a patient
individuals.212,213
with Marfan syndrome. There is a marked discrepancy between the Cardiac defects occur in as many as 50% to 70% of children
diameters of the ascending and descending aorta. and commonly include conotruncal and aortic arch anoma-
lies.214 Retardation of growth and development is usually due to
cardiac disease, nutritional problems, or growth hormone defi -
ciency. Th e developmental delay often is associated with sensory
After aortic root surgery some individuals may require chronic defi cits (vision and hearing loss). Most children have some
anticoagulation therapy. Preoperative hospitalization may be degree of mental retardation. Anesthetic implications, in addi-
necessary to adjust the anticoagulation regimen in anticipation tion to the cardiac defects, are focused around the airway.215 A
of surgery. In emergency cases, infusion of coagulation factors retrospective review of 50 cases reported upper airway abnor-
and other blood products may be required to off set the antico- malities in 56% of children apart from choanal atresia and cleft
agulants. In addition to vascular pathology, children with Marfan lip and palate.216
syndrome have a predisposition for ventricular dilatation as well
as abnormal ventricular function.204,205 Other Disorders
Several factors can result in pulmonary disease in these chil-
Tuberous Sclerosis
dren.206 Chest wall deformities and progressive scoliosis can
Tuberous sclerosis is a genetic disease with an autosomal
contribute to restrictive lung disease. In addition, it is thought
dominant inheritance pattern and an incidence of approximately
that the fi brillin defect may aff ect both lung development and
1 in 25,000 to 30,000 births.217 In a relatively large number of
homeostasis impairing pulmonary function. Th e development
children this can be attributed to spontaneous mutations. Th is
of pneumothoraces is relatively common.
systemic disease primarily presents as cutaneous and neuro-
logic symptoms, but cardiac and renal lesions are frequent
Associations
fi ndings.
VATER or VACTERL Association Th e presence of upper airway nodular tumors, fi bromas, or
VACTERL association is an acronym given to describe a series papillomas in aff ected children may interfere with airway man-
of nonrandom anomalies that include vertebral, anal, cardiovas- agement. Cardiac pathology is frequent and includes cardiac
cular, tracheoesophageal, renal, and limb defects.207,208 Up to rhabdomyoma in 60% of children and coexisting CHD in 33%
three fourths of children with VACTERL association have been of cases.218-220 Cardiac abnormalities with obstruction to fl ow,
reported to have CHD. Th e most common lesions include ven- heart failure, arrhythmias, conduction defects, or preexcitation
tricular septal defects, atrial septal defects, and tetralogy of may aff ect the selection of anesthetic agents. Preoperative evalu-
Fallot. Complex pathology such as truncus arteriosus and trans- ation in most cases should include an ECG to exclude arrhyth-
position of the great arteries occur less frequently. mia, conduction defects, or preexcitation.218 Blood pressure and
Vertebral and tracheal anomalies can complicate airway man- renal function should also be assessed. Anticonvulsants should
agement and regional anesthesia. Approximately 70% of chil- be optimized and continued until the morning of surgery. Gen-
dren with VACTERL have vertebral anomalies usually consisting erally, baseline medical treatment should be resumed as soon as
of hypoplastic vertebrae or hemivertebra. Th ese may predispose possible because seizures are the most common postoperative
children to developing scoliosis. Anal atresia or imperforate complication.221 Th e presence of mental retardation may require
anus is reported in about 55% of children. Th ese anomalies are the administration of agents such as midazolam or ketamine to
usually noted at birth and often require surgery in the fi rst days facilitate parental separation.
305

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
Selected Vascular Anomalies and Their anomaly may be seen in the context of conotruncal malforma-
tions. Th e diagnosis of an aberrant subclavian artery is made by
Implications for Anesthetic Care
most currently available imaging modalities.
Implications of this anomaly include the following:
Aberrant Subclavian Arteries
● Th e presence of an aberrant subclavian artery may infl uence
An aberrant or anomalous subclavian artery usually arises from
the location of placement of a systemic-to-pulmonary artery
the descending aorta as a separate vessel distal to the “usual” last
shunt.
subclavian artery in a posterior location. In a left aortic arch the
● Th is anomaly should be considered in the selection of a site
aberrant vessel is the right subclavian artery. In this anomaly the
for arterial line placement if the need for transesophageal
arrangement is as follows: the fi rst branch of the left aortic arch
monitoring is also anticipated during surgery. Th e aberrant
is the right carotid artery, followed by the left carotid and left
vessel may be compressed along its retroesophageal course
subclavian arteries. Th e aberrant right subclavian artery, rather
by the imaging probe, resulting in inaccurate readings.223 It
than arising proximally from the innominate artery as the fi rst
may be wise, regardless of the site of arterial line placement,
arch branch, originates distal to the last (left) subclavian artery
to monitor the arm supplied by the anomalous vessel by
as the fourth branch and courses behind the esophagus toward
pulse oximetry or other methods during esophageal
the right arm. Th is variant is one of the most common aortic
instrumentation.
arch anomalies. It is reported to occur in 0.4% to 2% of the
● On occasion, an aberrant subclavian artery may be part of a
general population and may or may not be associated with
CHD.222 Th ere is a high incidence of this anomaly in children vascular ring.
● Rarely, older children with a left aortic arch and aberrant
with Down syndrome and an association with ventricular septal
right subclavian artery and without the fi ndings of a com-
defects and tetralogy of Fallot among other lesions. In a right
plete vascular ring may complain of mild dysphagia (dyspha-
aortic arch, the anomalous left subclavian artery originates
gia lusorium).
distal to the origin of the right subclavian artery (Fig. 14-9). Th is
S S
RCA LCA LCA RCA
RSA RSA
Ab LSA
Ab LSA
R L L R
A I B I
Figure 14-9. The MR images, as visualized anteriorly (A) and posteriorly (B), demonstrate a right aortic arch with an aberrant left subcla-
vian artery (Ab LSA). The fi rst arch vessel is the left carotid artery (LCA), followed by the right carotid (RCA), and right subclavian artery
(RSA). The Ab LSA is the most distal branch originating from the descending aorta and coursing toward the left arm. This vessel may be
compressed by a transesophageal echocardiographic probe.
306

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Persistent Left Superior Vena Cava to Coronary ● On occasion, an LSVC may drain to an unroofed coronary
Sinus Communication sinus or directly into the left atrium, in which case a right-
A persistent left superior vena cava (LSVC) is a form of anoma- to-left shunt is present. Th is may be identifi ed by injection
lous systemic venous drainage identifi ed in 4.4% of children with of agitated saline into a left arm or left neck vein while
CHD, most frequently those with septal defects.224 It represents performing an echocardiogram and may be associated
a remnant of the left anterior cardinal vein that typically obliter- with systemic arterial desaturation. Th is constitutes a risk for
ates during development. If it persists, it remains patent and paradoxical systemic embolization.
drains into the right atrium via an enlarged coronary sinus. ● During cardiac surgery an enlarged coronary sinus
Bilateral superior vena cavae can be present (Fig. 14-10), or the may interfere with the administration of retrograde car-
right superior vena cava might be absent. In the presence of dioplegia.
bilateral superior vena cavae the two vascular structures may ● It may confound placement of a pulmonary artery catheter
communicate via an innominate or bridging vein. and cardiac output determinations.
Implications of this anomaly include the following:
● In the absence of an innominate vein a catheter placed in the
Evaluation of the Patient with a
left arm or left internal jugular vein and advanced into the
central circulation may rest within the coronary sinus, a Cardiac Murmur
potentially undesirable location in a small infant. On chest
radiography an unusual course is identifi ed as the catheter Th e fi nding of an incidental murmur during the perioperative
courses along the left side of the mediastinum and can period in many cases results in signifi cant distress to the child
be mistaken for intracarotid, intrapleural, or mediastinal or family, may trigger additional diagnostic studies including
locations. cardiology consultation, and has the potential to delay the
● An LVSC may be of relevance during venous cannulation for scheduled procedure when identifi ed preoperatively. Although
cardiopulmonary bypass to ensure adequate venous drainage cardiac auscultation is a challenging skill that takes many years
and optimal operating conditions. of practice to master,225 it is important for the practicing anes-
● Th e presence of an LSVC is important in patients with thesiologist who cares for children to recognize the main physi-
single-ventricle physiology undergoing palliation involving a cal fi ndings that may distinguish an innocent cardiac murmur
cavopulmonary (Glenn) connection(s). from a pathologic one. In addition, knowledge of several core
● Association with a dilated coronary sinus. On transesopha- concepts and red fl ags can help avoid overlooking potentially
geal echocardiography it may be confused with other defects, important diagnoses.
including an ostium primum atrial septal defect (one that lies Th e majority of normal children, in the range of 90%, will
in the inferior aspect of the atrial septum) and anomalous have a murmur at some point in their lives. Th is is most com-
pulmonary venous return to the coronary sinus. monly identifi ed during the neonatal period and early school
A B
Figure 14-10. Bilateral superior vena cavae. A, Angiogram depicting the superior vena cava, normally a right-sided structure, as it drains
into the right atrium. B, Angiogram in the same child demonstrating drainage of a large left superior vena cava into the coronary sinus. The
catheter courses from the inferior vena cava into the right atrium, coronary sinus, and left superior vena cava. Contrast medium into the
left superior vena cava demonstrates no innominate (or bridging) vein. A dilated coronary sinus is noted.
307

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
years. A great majority of murmurs are functional, otherwise Whenever there is doubt regarding the benign versus the
considered innocent in nature, and require no special treatment. pathologic nature of a murmur, consultation with a pediatric
Th is diagnosis is based on physical fi ndings consistent with the cardiologist is indicated. A chest radiograph and ECG, although
benign nature of the specifi c murmur. thought by some to add minimal value in the initial diagnostic
While a complete discussion of cardiac murmur evaluation assessment of a cardiac murmur228,229 and to not be cost eff ec-
is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is pertinent to review a tive,230 may be helpful when considering if further consultation
few key concepts related to the distinction between innocent is indicated.
versus pathologic murmurs.226,227 Th e basic systematic approach
when assessing a heart murmur is the same as when evaluating
Basic Interpretation of the Pediatric
any child’s cardiovascular system. Auscultation with both the
diaphragm and bell of the stethoscope in the positions of the Electrocardiogram
four primary cardiac valves should occur with the child and
environment as quiet as possible. Innocent murmurs of infancy Despite the increasing applications of imaging modalities in the
and childhood include pulmonary fl ow murmur, Still’s murmur, structural and functional assessment of pediatric heart disease,
physiologic pulmonary branch stenosis, venous hum, and electrocardiography continues to play a signifi cant role in the
carotid bruit. Innocent murmurs are usually of low intensity diagnosis and management of these children. An ECG is con-
(grades I-II of VI) and are associated with a normal cardiovas- sidered an integral part of the evaluation of most children with
cular examination (e.g., normal precordial activity, fi rst and congenital and acquired cardiovascular pathology.
second heart sounds, peripheral pulses, capillary refi ll). Inno- Although the characteristic features of a normal ECG in
cent murmurs, such as those associated with peripheral pulmo- infants and children were described many decades ago it is sur-
nary branch stenosis, right ventricular outfl ow murmurs, and prising that it continues to be one of the most often misinter-
Still’s murmurs, tend to be soft, systolic ejection type and not preted screening tests in pediatric medicine.231 Th is is largely
holosystolic in duration. Physiologic murmurs often resolve by due to the developmental changes that occur in the normal
changing the child’s hemodynamic state, either with maneuvers individual as he or she progresses from the neonatal period
such as lying down or sitting up, or temporal changes such as through childhood, adolescence, and adulthood.232 Normal
resolution of fever, improvement in anemia, and so on. Diastolic values for children of various ages have been established.233
or continuous murmurs are typically abnormal, with the excep- Indeed, knowledge of normal confi gurations and values for var-
tion of a venous hum. Th is murmur is thought to be related to ious ages of children is essential for accurate interpretation.232-235
turbulent fl ow of systemic venous return in the jugular veins and Immediately after birth there is a predominance of right
superior vena cava and is best heard at the base of the neck. ventricular forces represented by tall R waves in the right pre-
Murmurs accompanied by a palpable thrill are always cordial leads (V and V) (Fig. 14-11). Over the fi rst several years,
1 2
pathologic. the typical ECG changes to a more familiar left-sided heart
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-11. Normal ECG in a 2-day-old infant. The normal predominance of right ventricular forces during the neonatal period (tall R
waves over the right precordial leads (V and V) is evident. The inverted T waves in V are normal for age.
1 2 1-3
308

14
Essentials of Cardiology
dominant confi guration with larger S waves in the right precor- with an S-wave dominant pattern in both I and aVF) are always
dial leads and a gradual RS progression with tall R waves in the abnormal and merit further investigation. Th is is a frequent
left precordial leads (V and V) (Fig. 14-12). Th e predominance fi nding in children with atrioventricular septal defects. Evaluat-
5 6
of right-sided heart forces coupled with the need to evaluate for ing the T wave, or repolarization axis, is also important, because
dextrocardia are the primary reasons that pediatric ECGs should a diff erence of greater than 90 degrees between the QRS and
include the VR and VR leads, which are not routinely obtained T-wave axes can represent strain on the ventricle, which is fre-
3 4
in adult studies. Th ese electrodes are placed in the correspond- quently associated with ventricular hypertrophy (see Fig.
ing V and V locations over the right precordium. 14-1).
3 4
Clinical information of relevance in the interpretation of an Once the evaluation of rhythm and axes is complete, each
ECG includes the child’s age, gender, suspected or documented component of the cardiac cycle as represented on the ECG
diagnosis, and indications for the examination. A number of should be examined. Th e P wave represents atrial systole; and
requirements are essential for accurate interpretation. Th ese its morphology, with particular interest in leads II and V, can
1
include appropriate skin preparation, electrode placement, and demonstrate either right atrial (P wave amplitude >2.5 mm or
an artifact-free recording. A systematic, organized approach to 3.0 mm based on age) or left atrial (P wave duration >100 to
the pediatric ECG is suggested. Determination of the rate and 120 msec based on age) enlargement (Fig. 14-13). Th e PR inter-
rhythm, with evaluation of the P wave vector and the relation- val represents the time required for passage of an impulse from
ship between each P wave and QRS complex, is the fi rst step. It the sinoatrial node until ventricular depolarization and is largely
is important to consider the infl uences of age, autonomic composed of the atrioventricular nodal delay. A prolonged PR
nervous system, level of physical activity, medications, pain, and interval, which is age specifi c, indicates fi rst-degree atrioven-
temperature on the child’s heart rate. Th e P wave should be tricular block. A short PR interval, on the other hand, should
upright or positive in leads I and aVF, indicating that the sinus alert the practitioner to closely evaluate the QRS duration for
node is the pacemaker of the heart (sinus rhythm, see Fig. 14- signs of pre-excitation (Wolff -Parkinson-White syndrome, Fig.
12). Normally, the P wave should precede the QRS complex. 14-14) although a short PR interval may also refl ect a low right
Next, the QRS electrical axis should be determined. Th e QRS atrial pacemaker.
frontal plane axis is determined by identifying the most iso- Th e QRS complex represents ventricular depolarization. Th e
electric lead, which will be perpendicular to the direction of QRS duration should be examined in a lead with a Q wave
ventricular depolarization. Alternatively, the direction of present (often lead V or V) for signs of conduction delay. Th e
5 6
depolarization in leads I and aVF can be examined to roughly importance of age-dependent normal values is obvious here,
approximate the axis. As with all other components of the because the upper limits of normal QRS durations are only
evaluation discussed here, the physiologic changes that occur 80 msec in neonates. Th e presence of a wide QRS complex with
with growth are responsible for the change in normal values an RSR′ pattern in V is indicative of right bundle branch block,
1
for the QRS axis based on age. Regardless of age, QRS axes that and a QS pattern in V and a tall notched R wave in V is indica-
1 6
lie in the northwest quadrant (between 180 and 270 degrees tive of left bundle branch block. Other conditions associated
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-12. Normal ECG in a 10-year-old child. The typical left-sided heart dominant confi guration of children this age is noted (gradual
RS progression with tall R waves in the left precordial leads [V and V]). This is in contrast to the right ventricular dominant pattern seen
5 6
during infancy and early childhood. The tracing demonstrates normal sinus rhythm, as documented by positive P waves in leads I and aVF.
309

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-13. Biatrial enlargement. The tracing was obtained in the emergency department setting in a child subsequently found to have
restrictive cardiomyopathy. There is evidence of biatrial enlargement as determined by the tall and wide P waves in leads II and V,
1
respectively.
with prolongation of the QRS duration include ventricular pre- gestive of myocardial ischemia and require further evaluation.
excitation and ventricular pacing. An additional, relatively rare but crucial, fi nding occurs in
In addition to the QRS duration, the components of the QRS infants with anomalous origin of the left coronary artery arising
complex should be examined. Q waves are often present in the from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA). Classically, the ECG in
lateral and inferior leads, as well as lead aVR, but should be these children demonstrates deep, wide Q waves in leads I and
narrow (less than 40 msec) and shallow (age dependent, but aVL with ST-segment and T-wave changes in the anterior dis-
generally less than 5 mm deep). Deep or wide Q waves are sug- tribution (V-V) consistent with compromised myocardial
2 4
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-14. The tracing demonstrates the typical ECG features of the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome: short PR interval, delta wave,
and prolongation of the QRS interval.
310

14
Essentials of Cardiology
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-15. ECG tracing obtained in infant with poor ventricular function found to have anomalous origin of the left main coronary
artery from the pulmonary root. The presence of Q waves in aVL and the diffuse ST-T wave changes suggestive of ischemia are classic for
this anomaly.
blood fl ow (Fig. 14-15). Th e QRS amplitudes are also important Although a detailed organized approach to pediatric ECG
in assessing both left and right ventricular hypertrophy. Condi- interpretation is necessary, there are occasions when particular
tions associated with increased QRS voltages that likely require conditions or circumstances cause global ECG changes that
echocardiographic assessment include hypertrophic cardiomy- must be quickly recognized. One such case that may occur in
opathy, left ventricular noncompaction, and Pompe disease (see the operating room relates to the ECG changes associated with
Fig. 14-2). hyperkalemia. As the potassium level rises, the T-wave ampli-
ST segments should be fl at and should not be depressed more tude will increase. Th is is followed by widening of the QRS
than 0.5 mm or elevated more than 1 mm in any lead. Th e major duration (Fig. 14-16) due to an intraventricular conduction
exception to this rule is when there is gradual upsloping of the delay and, fi nally, atrioventricular block and arrhythmias,
ST segment in the mid-precordial leads as seen in early repo- including ventricular tachycardia and fi brillation. Other electro-
larization. T waves represent ventricular repolarization and lyte disturbances that may result in characteristic changes on
should all be upright in the precordial leads at birth. Within 1 the ECG are as follows:
to 3 days they become inverted, initially in V, and eventually in ● Hypokalemia: decreased T-wave amplitude, ST-segment
1
V, V, and sometimes in V. Starting at several years of age the depression, and the presence of U waves
2 3 4
T waves will return to the upright position in the reverse order. ● Hypercalcemia: shortening of the QT interval, sinus rate
In normal adolescents and adults the T wave in lead V may be slowing, and sinoatrial block
1
upright or inverted. Th e only limb lead that typically displays an ● Hypocalcemia: lengthening of the QT interval
inverted T wave is aVR. ● Hypomagnesemia: enhanced eff ects of hypocalcemia
One fi nal aspect of the cardiac cycle that must be examined
on any ECG is the QT interval—the time from the onset of
ventricular depolarization, marked by the onset of the QRS Essentials of Cardiac Rhythm
complex, until the completion of repolarization, marked by the
Interpretation and Acute Arrhythmia
end of the T wave. It represents the duration of electrical activa-
tion and recovery of the ventricular myocardium and is mea- Management in Children
sured as follows:
Rhythm abnormalities may be identifi ed during the preopera-
Corrected QT (QTc) = measured QT interval/square root of
tive assessment, in the operating room, or in the postoperative
preceding RR interval
period. Th e considerations usually revolve around (1) identifi ca-
A QTc that exceeds 460 msec is considered abnormal regard- tion of the rhythm disorder; (2) establishing the need for acute
less of age. All QTc values that exceed normal values for age therapy; (3) deciding whether to consult a pediatric cardiologist;
merit further investigation. Medications that prolong the QT and (4) conveying pertinent information to the consultant to
interval should be avoided until the child has been evaluated by assist in the characterization of the rhythm disturbance and to
a cardiologist. establish a management plan.
311

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
A 25 mm/s 10 mm/mV 100 Hz
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
B
Figure 14-16. ECG shows changes that may result from hyperkalemia. A, In this 12-year-old male’s ECG, there is marked widening of the
QRS complexes, associated with peaked T waves. If untreated, this may progress to ventricular fi brillation and asystole. B, Tracing in same
patient obtained several hours after treatment of electrolyte disturbance demonstrating resolution of the ECG changes.
Th e following principles should be considered in addressing comprehensive discussion of arrhythmia interpretation is
these issues: beyond the scope of this chapter, a brief overview of the
1. Operating room, bedside, or transport monitors and strip characteristic features of normal and abnormal cardiac
recordings facilitate the recognition of rhythm disorders but rhythms in the pediatric age group is presented in the section
in most cases are inadequate for defi nitive diagnosis. A 15- that follows.
lead surface ECG and rhythm strip should be obtained in all 3. Th e need for acute therapy for a rhythm disturbance should
children when feasible. be based primarily on the nature of the disorder, urgency of
2. In general, clinicians caring for children should have a basic the situation, and the likelihood that this abnormality would
knowledge of cardiac rhythm interpretation. Although a or would not be tolerated beyond the immediate short-term
312

14
Essentials of Cardiology
period. Th e guidelines established by the American Heart Basic Rhythms
Association for Pediatric Advanced Life Support should be
Sinus Rhythm
followed in all patients.236 In general, in otherwise healthy
As discussed in the section on basic electrocardiography, sinus
children, and in contrast to ventricular arrhythmias, supra-
rhythm is characterized by a P wave that precedes every QRS,
ventricular tachyarrhythmias are rarely life threatening.
a QRS that follows every P wave, and an upright P wave in leads
4. Th e degree of comfort in the characterization and manage-
I and aVF (see Fig. 14-12).
ment of pediatric cardiac arrhythmias is likely to be quite
Sinus Arrhythmia
variable among anesthesia care providers. For arrhythmias
Th is represents cyclic changes in the heart rate during breath-
secondary to respiratory compromise, electrolyte imbalance,
ing. Th is is a normal fi nding in healthy children (Fig. 14-17).
or metabolic derangements, consultation with a pediatric
cardiologist is probably not required. Th is is also the case for Sinus Bradycardia
variants or benign rhythm disturbances such as sinus Th is is characterized by sinus rhythm with heart rates below
arrhythmia, low atrial rhythms, or occasional premature normal for age (see Fig. 14-1). Slow heart rates can be observed
atrial beats. Consultation is appropriate in most children during sleep or at times of high vagal tone. When there is sig-
with known structural heart disease (unoperated, palliated, nifi cant sinus bradycardia, a slow junctional escape rhythm or a
or those who have undergone defi nitive interventions) or slow atrial rhythm originating from an ectopic focus may be
acquired cardiovascular pathology, in those with a history of present. Certain forms of CHD may be prone to slow heart
a cardiac rhythm disorder under the care of a cardiologist, rhythms (i.e., heterotaxy syndromes).
and in the majority of those with acute arrhythmias, particu- In the intraoperative setting, particularly on induction of
larly when the initiation of antiarrhythmic drug therapy is anesthesia, with laryngoscopy, endotracheal intubation, or tra-
anticipated. cheal suctioning, sinus bradycardia may occur. Sinus bradycar-
5. When consulting a specialist information that may be helpful dia may also be due to drug administration (i.e., opioids) or
to communicate includes pertinent details regarding the increased parasympathetic tone. Th is type of sinus bradycardia
child’s history, clinical diagnosis, nature of the procedure/ rarely poses signifi cant hemodynamic compromise and, if nec-
intervention, relevant laboratory values, description or char- essary, can be easily treated with removal of the stimulus,
acterization of the rhythm abnormality, associated hemody- administration of a vagolytic agent (pancuronium), or chrono-
namic parameters, circumstances surrounding the event— tropic agents such as atropine or epinephrine. Sinus bradycardia
including the presence or absence of an intracardiac catheter, may also result from hypoxemia, hypothermia, acidosis, electro-
review of the pharmacologic agents administered (including lyte imbalance, or increased intracranial pressure. Bradycardia
anesthetic agents), and other therapies if applicable. Th e con- related to hypoxemia should be treated promptly with the
sultant should assist in the characterization of the rhythm administration of supplemental oxygen and appropriate airway
disorder, advise as to whether further evaluation is indi- management (see Chapter 40). Th e approach to other secondary
cated, make recommendations for treatment, and facilitate forms of sinus bradycardia should focus on addressing the
diagnostic/therapeutic interventions as necessary. underlying cause. For worrisome low heart rates, particularly in
**All leads at half standard**
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-17. Sinus arrhythmia. The rhythm tracing demonstrates the normal heart rate variability with respiration. There is a normal
increase in heart rate during inspiration. This is a natural response and is more frequently seen in children.
313

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
small infants, or clinical evidence of compromised hemodynam- dren with right ventricular volume overload (e.g., those with
ics, pharmacologic therapy (isoproterenol infusion) or tempo- atrial septal defects). Complete right bundle branch block (QRS
rary pacing should be considered. complex greater than 100 msec for infants, 120 msec for older
children) is frequently identifi ed in children after surgical pro-
Sinus Tachycardia
cedures that involve the right ventricular outfl ow tract. Th is is
During sinus tachycardia, sinus rhythm occurs at a heart rate
characterized by an RSR′ wave pattern in V, as well as an
above normal for age (Fig. 14-18). In the perioperative setting 1
inverted T wave, and a wide and deep S (slurred) wave in V.
this is often the result of surgical stimulation, stress, pain, hypo- 6
Left bundle branch block is an uncommon fi nding in the pedi-
volemia, anemia, fever, medications (i.e., inotropic agents), or a
atric age group that may result from cardiac interventions along
high catecholamine state. Treatment is directed at the underly-
the left ventricular outfl ow tract. Criteria for this conduction
ing cause. Prolonged periods of sinus tachycardia may impair
disorder include a prominent QS or rS complex in lead V and
diastolic fi lling time, limit ventricular preload, and compromise 1
tall, wide, and often notched R wave in leads I, aVL, and V.
cardiac output. Children at risk of hemodynamic decompensa- 6
tion include those with signifi cant degrees of ventricular hyper- Atrioventricular Block
trophy or diastolic dysfunction.
First-Degree Atrioventricular Block
Junctional Rhythm In fi rst-degree atrioventricular (AV) block there is prolongation
A junctional rhythm is characterized by QRS complexes of mor- of the PR interval beyond the normal range for age. Each P wave
phology identical to that of sinus rhythm without preceding P is followed by a conducted QRS. Th is may be found in healthy
waves. Th is rhythm is slower than the expected sinus rate. When individuals but can also be seen in various disease states. In
this rhythm completely takes over the pacemaker activity of the general, fi rst-degree AV block is a benign condition requiring
heart, retrograde P waves and atrioventricular dissociation may no specifi c treatment.
be seen. Junctional rhythms during cardiac surgery are fre-
quently the result of manipulation/dissection in the proximity Second-Degree Atrioventricular Block
of the right atrium. Th e central venous pressure contour typi- Th ere are two forms of second-degree AV block: Mobitz type I
cally demonstrates prominent v waves (right atrial pressure (Wenckebach) and Mobitz type II. Th ese are characterized by a
wave at the end of systole) due to the loss of AV synchrony (Fig. periodic failure to conduct atrial impulses to the ventricle (P
14-19). Th e lack of atrial contribution to ventricular fi lling may wave without following QRS complex). In type I second-degree
result in decreases in the systemic arterial blood pressure. AV block there is a progressive lengthening of the PR interval
with eventual failure of conduction of the next atrial impulse to
the ventricle. Th e RR intervals concomitantly shorten. Th e
Conduction Disorders
degree of AV block is expressed as the ratio of P waves per QRS
Bundle Branch Block complexes (i.e., 2 : 1, 3 : 2). Th is can occur during periods of high
Incomplete right bundle branch block pattern (RSR′ in right vagal tone or in the postoperative setting. It is generally a benign
precordial leads with near normal QRS duration) occurs in chil- phenomenon that requires no therapy. In the less frequent, type
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-18. ECG in a febrile infant displaying the features of sinus tachycardia (heart rate above normal for age and QRS complexes of
normal appearance preceded by P waves that are upright in leads I and aVF).
314

14
Essentials of Cardiology
II
V
A
100
ART1
50
CVP
0
SpO2
B
Figure 14-19. (A) Intraoperative tracing obtained during cardiac surgery at the time of right atrial dissection demonstrating the features of
a junctional rhythm. Retrograde P waves are identifi ed following the QRS complexes. (B) The central venous pressure (CVP) tracing
demonstrates prominent v waves (arrows) related to the loss of atrioventricular synchrony (scale 0-30 mm Hg).
II second-degree AV block there is a relatively constant PR Cardiac Arrhythmias
interval before an atrial impulse that fails to conduct. Th is is
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
considered a more serious conduction disturbance and merits
further investigation. Premature Atrial Contractions or Beats
Isolated premature atrial contractions (PACs) are relatively
Th ird-Degree (Complete) Atrioventricular Block common in infants and small children. On the ECG the early P
Th ird-degree AV block is characterized by total failure of con- waves exhibit a morphology and axis that diff er from those in
duction of atrial impulses to the ventricle. It can be either con- normal sinus rhythm. Premature atrial contractions may be con-
genital or acquired. Th ere is complete AV dissociation, with ducted to the ventricles normally, blocked at the AV node, or
more atrial than ventricular contractions, and the ventricular conduct aberrantly (abnormal QRS morphology). Th ese are
rate is usually slow and regular (Fig. 14-20). Temporary pacing usually benign and require no therapy. If a central venous cath-
may be indicated in the acute setting. eter is present, the tip position should be evaluated.
315

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
II
Figure 14-20. Surface ECG tracing demonstrates independent atrial and ventricular activity (atrioventricular dissociation) and failure of any
atrial impulses to conduct to the ventricles. These are features of complete atrioventricular block.
Supraventricular Tachycardia maneuvers should also be obtained. Th e management of SVT
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is the most common signifi - depends on the clinical status of the child, type of tachycardia,
cant arrhythmia in infants and children.237,238 It is characterized and precise electrophysiologic mechanism. General manage-
by a regular tachyarrhythmia (tachycardia heart rate is age ment principles include the following:
dependent but typically >230 beats per minute in children) with ● Determination of hemodynamic stability. In the presence of
a narrow or “usual” complex QRS morphology. Supraventricular hemodynamic instability synchronized direct current car-
tachycardia can occur in structurally normal hearts as well as in dioversion (0.5-1.0 J/kg) should be performed.236
various forms of CHD. “Usual” complex implies that the QRS ● Antiarrhythmic therapy is based primarily on the clinical
morphology in tachycardia is similar to that in normal sinus condition and suspected tachycardia mechanism. Vagal
rhythm (Fig. 14-21). On occasion, widening of the QRS in SVT maneuvers may be considered but should not delay treatment.
may be secondary to bundle branch block or related to the Adenosine is the drug of choice in the acute setting for
tachycardia mechanism (SVT with aberrancy). A wide QRS diagnosis and termination of most supraventricular
complex may make the distinction between supraventricular tachycardias.239,240 β blockers are most often used for chronic
and ventricular tachycardia diffi cult. therapy.
Th ere are two general types of SVT: automatic and reentrant. ● Others measures include treatment of fever if present, seda-
Th ese can be diff erentiated by evaluating characteristics of the tion, correction of electrolyte disturbance, decreasing or
tachycardia, usually assisted by the input from a specialist. Th e withdrawing medications associated with sympathetic stim-
evaluation of a tachyarrhythmia should include a surface 15- ulation (i.e., inotropic agents) or with vagolytic properties
lead ECG and continuous rhythm strip to document onset and (i.e., pancuronium).
termination; and, if a medication such as adenosine has been ● In addition to pharmacologic therapy, atrial pacing or car-
administered, a recording of the response to the drug or pacing dioversion may be required.
II
V
100 30
ART1 CVP2
50 15
CVP
0 0
SPO
2
Figure 14-21. The initial portion of the tracing demonstrates normal sinus rhythm. A premature atrial beat initiates a narrow complex
tachycardia (QRS morphology same as in sinus rhythm). The supraventricular tachycardia is associated with hemodynamic changes (note
the decrease in the systemic arterial pressure, ART 1, scale 0-100 mm Hg and the increase in the central venous pressure, CVP, scale
0-30 mm Hg; oxygen saturation, SpO2).
316

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Ventricular Arrhythmias diate morphology between two other distinct QRS morpholo-
gies), (3) QRS morphology of VT similar to that of single PVCs,
Premature Ventricular Contractions or Beats
and (4) tachycardia rate in children usually below 250 beats per
Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) are characterized by
minute.
(1) prematurity of the QRS complex, (2) a QRS morphology that
Acute onset of VT in pediatric patients may be due to hypoxia,
diff ers from that in sinus rhythm, (3) usually a prolongation of
acidosis, electrolyte imbalance, or metabolic problems. Ven-
the QRS duration for age, (4) abnormalities of the ST segment
tricular tachycardia may also occur in the context of depressed
and T wave, and (5) premature ventricular activity not preceded
myocardial function, poor hemodynamics, prior surgical inter-
by a premature atrial beat. PVCs of a single QRS morphology
ventions, cardiomyopathies, myocardial tumors, acute injury
(uniform), without associated symptoms, and in children with
(infl ammation, trauma), and prolonged QT syndromes.241,242
structurally normal hearts are generally considered benign. An
Among patients with CHD and ventricular arrhythmias, those
ECG during sinus rhythm should allow for careful measurement
at higher risk include older children after tetralogy of Fallot
of the QT interval. Further investigation and consultation is
repair.
warranted in the presence of PVCs of multiple morphologies
(multiform), if these occur with moderate frequency or in suc-
cession (couplets or runs), and are associated with symptoms or Long QT Syndrome
a structurally abnormal heart. Long QT syndrome (Fig. 14-23) is an electrical cardiac distur-
Ventricular ectopy in the perioperative period may be the bance that can predispose children to arrhythmias that include
result of profound hypoxemia, electrolyte disturbances, or met- torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia (Fig. 14-24), ven-
abolic derangements. Other causes include the use of recre- tricular fi brillation, and bradyarrhythmias resulting in syncope,
ational drugs, myocardial injury, poor hemodynamics, and prior cardiac arrest, or sudden death.243 Congenital and acquired
cardiac surgical intervention. forms have been described. Th e congenital varieties (i.e.,
Romano-Ward, Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndromes) are likely
Ventricular Tachycardia the result of a genetic defect in the sodium or potassium chan-
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is relatively uncommon in chil- nels responsible for maintaining electrical homeostasis in the
dren. It is defi ned as three or more consecutive ventricular beats heart.244 Diagnostic criteria proposed for the long QT syndrome
occurring at a rate greater than 120 beats per minute (Fig. include ECG fi ndings, clinical history (deafness, syncope), and
14-22). Th e QRS morphology in VT is diff erent than that in family history.245 A frequent feature is prolongation of the QTc
sinus rhythm, and the QRS duration is typically prolonged for on the resting ECG .
age. ECG features that support this diagnosis include (1) AV An important consideration in the care of children with long
dissociation, (2) intermittent fusion (QRS complex of interme- QT syndrome is ensuring adequate β-adrenergic blockade pre-
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-22. The tracing demonstrates frequent uniform premature ventricular beats and episodes of nonsustained monomorphic
ventricular tachycardia.
317

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
I aVR V1 V4 V3R
II aVL V2 V5 V4R
III aVF V3 V6 V7
II
Figure 14-23. Long QT syndrome. Note the appearance of a prolonged QT interval on the ECG.
operatively and minimizing adrenergic stimulation.243 In view of 2. Th e initial approach in the care of a child with an acute ven-
the fact that the evidence for risk is variable among the many tricular rhythm disturbance is the prompt evaluation of clini-
drugs associated with torsades de pointes, the drugs have been cal status and hemodynamic stability. Sustained ventricular
divided into several groups (these are listed and updated on www. arrhythmias are generally poorly tolerated and require
qtdrugs.org). Intraoperative arrhythmias can be treated with immediate attention. In the unstable child, cardiopulmonary
additional doses of β blockers. Magnesium and/or amiodarone resuscitation should be instituted while preparing for cardio-
may be required in some cases. Bradyarrhythmias can be managed version. Expert consultation is advisable when advanced
by pacing. Conditions and drugs associated with prolongation of drug therapy is contemplated. Drugs that may be considered
the QT interval should be avoided if possible. Despite the fact include lidocaine, amiodarone or procainamide.236 Th e latter
that several drugs routinely administered during anesthetic care two should not routinely be administered concurrently due
(intravenous medications and inhalational agents) increase the to QT prolongation.
QT interval, in most cases these drugs are given without untow- 3. Electrical cardioversion in torsades de pointes should
ard eff ects. Th is supports the concept that other factors, such as be performed only if the arrhythmia is sustained. Magne-
the eff ect of a drug on the dispersion of myocardial repolariza- sium sulfate is considered a fi rst-line drug. Procainamide
tion, may be more predictive of arrhythmogenic potential rather is contraindicated due to prolongation of the QT
than prolongation of the QT interval per se. Th e care of these interval.
patients should be planned in combination with a specialist. 4. In addition to β blockade, some congenital forms of the
Prolongation of the QT interval may also result from electro- long QT syndrome may require implantation of a cardio-
lyte derangements (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomag- verter-defi brillator.
nesemia), drug therapy (antibiotics, antiarrhythmic agents,
antipsychotic drugs, cisapride), and neurologic or endocrine Ventricular Fibrillation
abnormalities. Th erapy in this setting should focus on correc- Ventricular fi brillation (VF) is an uncommon arrhythmia in
tion of the underlying cause. children. It is characterized by chaotic, asynchronous ventricu-
Considerations in the management of VT are as follows: lar activity that fails to generate an adequate cardiac output. Th e
1. Although some atypical forms of supraventricular tachyar- ECG in VF demonstrates low-amplitude irregular defl ections
rhythmias may mimic VT, a wide QRS tachycardia should without identifi able QRS complexes. A loose ECG electrode
always be considered to be of ventricular origin. may mimic these surface ECG features; thus, immediate clinical
Figure 14-24. The typical positive and negative oscillation of
QRS complexes that characterize torsades de pointes
ventricular tachycardia are shown.
318

14
Essentials of Cardiology
assessment should be performed and adequate pad contact ● Th e fi fth to multisite pacing (A = atrium, V = ventricle, D =
assured when VF is suspected. dual or both, O = none)
Considerations in the management of VF are as follows:
1. Th is is a lethal arrhythmia if untreated. Permanent Cardiac Pacing
2. Immediate defi brillation (initial dose 2 J/kg) is the defi nitive
therapy. If this is unsuccessful, the energy dose should be Indications
doubled (4 J/kg) and repeated. Pediatric paddles (2.2 cm Guidelines for permanent pacing in children, adolescents, and
diameter) are generally recommended for children weighing patients with CHD were updated in 2002.247 Indications include
less than 10 kg. Adult paddles (8-9 mm diameter) are sug- symptomatic sinus bradycardia, bradycardia-tachycardia syn-
gested for children weighing more than 10 kg to reduce dromes, congenital complete AV block, and advanced second-
impedance and maximize current fl ow. or third-degree AV block.247,248
3. Adequate airway control and chest compressions should be
rapidly instituted while preparing for defi brillation or Perioperative Considerations
between shocks if several defi brillation attempts are needed. Device interrogation should be part of the complete preopera-
Resuscitative drugs should strongly be considered without tive evaluation in all patients with implanted pacemaker systems
delaying defi brillation. scheduled for anesthetic care.249,250 Consultation with a special-
ist to obtain information regarding unit type, settings, date of
and indications for implantation, and underlying rhythm is
Pacemaker Therapy in the Pediatric
highly recommended. If unit information is not readily available
Age Group a chest radiograph provides identifi cation of the device, as indi-
cated by a radiopaque marker. Alternatively, the major pace-
Pacemaker Nomenclature maker manufacturers can be contacted on an around-the-clock
Th e pacemaker nomenclature was revised by the North Ameri- basis as they maintain computerized records of all implanted
can Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology and the British devices that can be readily accessed. Results of a recent 15-lead
Pacing and Electrophysiology Group in 2000,246 as follows (Table ECG should be reviewed. Reprogramming may be required
14-3): before the planned procedure to avoid potential problems with
● Th e fi rst letter refers to the chamber(s) paced (A = atrium, pacemaker malfunction related to electrocautery. Electrocau-
V = ventricle, D = dual or both, O = none) tery is one of the most common potential sources of electro-
● Th e second to the chamber(s) sensed (A = atrium, V = ven- magnetic interference in patients with implanted cardiac devices.
tricle, D = dual or both, O = none) Recommendations for the perioperative management of these
● Th e third to the pacemaker’s response to sensing (I = inhib- children include (1) the use of bipolar cautery versus a unipolar
ited, T = triggered, D = dual response, O = none) confi guration if possible; (2) avoidance of cauterization near the
● Th e fourth to rate modulation (R = rate modulation, O = generator, and (3) positioning of the indiff erent plate for elec-
none) trocautery away from the pacemaker so that the device is not
Table 14-3. NASPE/BPEG Generic Pacemaker Code*
Position I II III IV V
Category Chamber(s) Paced Chamber(s) Sensed Response to Sensed Event Rate Modulation Multisite Pacing
A = Atrium A = Atrium I = Inhibited R = Rate modulation A = Atrium
V = Ventricle V = Ventricle T = Triggered O = none V = Ventricle
D = Dual (A & V) D = Dual (A & V) D = Dual (I & T) response D = Dual (A & V)
O = None O = None restricted to dual chamber O = None
devices
O = None
*Revised 2000.
Most Common Pacing Modes:
The pacemaker mode, specifi ed by a code, describes the mode in which the pacemaker is operating.
Single-Chamber Pacing:
AAI: atrial demand pacing (atrial pacing and sensing, inhibited on sensed beat)
AAIR: atrial demand pacing (atrial pacing and sensing, inhibited on sensed beat), rate responsiveness
VVI: ventricular demand pacing (ventricular pacing and sensing, inhibited on sensed beat)
VVIR: ventricular demand pacing (ventricular pacing and sensing, inhibited on sensed beat), rate responsiveness
Asynchronous Pacing (No Sensing):
AOO: fi xed rate atrial pacing
VOO: fi xed rate ventricular pacing
DOO: fi xed rate AV pacing
Dual-Chamber Pacing:
DDD: paces and senses both chambers
DDDR: paces and senses both chambers, sensor-driven rate responsiveness
319

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
between the electrocautery electrodes. Devices such as the har- netic interference (electrocautery).262,263 Perioperative consulta-
monic scalpel and battery operated hot wire hand-held cautery tion with a cardiologist/electrophysiologist is, therefore, essential
units do not interfere with implanted cardiac devices. Rate- in the care of these children. In many cases the devices may need
responsive features should be deactivated in the majority of to be adjusted or deactivated before surgery. Careful evaluation
cases. Chronotropic drugs and alternate pacing modalities and device reprogramming is advisable at the conclusion of the
(transcutaneous, transvenous, epicardial) should be readily surgical intervention.
available in the event of pacemaker malfunction and compro-
mising underlying rate. Although insertion of a transvenous Diagnostic Modalities in
pacing system has been advised in children with complete AV
Pediatric Cardiology
block undergoing pacemaker implantation, a 10-year review
concluded that there is no benefi t to routine preoperative tem-
Chest Radiography
porary pacing in these children.251 Capture thresholds can be
Th e standard posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs
aff ected by pharmacologic agents, and this should be considered
provide a number of clues regarding a child’s underlying cardio-
if pacing is required in the child receiving antiarrhythmic drug
vascular anatomy; however, plain radiographs in general are an
therapy. Perioperative conditions may also infl uence pacing
insensitive screening tool for cardiac disease.264 Children with
thresholds. A magnet should be accessible to allow for asyn-
numerous types of signifi cant CHD may have initially normal-
chronous pacing if required.252,253 Most generators respond to
appearing radiographs; alternatively, an infant with a poor inspi-
magnet application by pacing at a fi xed rate asynchronously
ratory eff ort and the presence of a large thymus may give the
(AOO, VOO, or DOO). A potential issue is that the specifi c
appearance of cardiomegaly and actually have normal intracar-
magnet rate, as determined by the manufacturer for the particu-
diac anatomy (Fig. 14-25).
lar device, may diff er from the desirable or optimal pacing rate.
Interpretation of a chest radiograph begins with identifi ca-
Th us, the use of a magnet should not be considered a substitute
tion of the patient’s name and ensuring that the right-left orien-
for preoperative pacemaker interrogation/programming. In
tation of the radiograph is appropriate. All lines and tubes
addition to perioperative ECG monitoring, additional modali-
(including endotracheal tube position if applicable and sternal
ties that confi rm pulse generation during pacing (esophageal
wires from prior surgeries as well as coils, devices, and stents
stethoscope for assessment of heart sounds, pulse oximetry,
from prior catheterization procedures) should be followed to
invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring) are strongly encour-
verify their location, course, and likely site of termination. Th e
aged. After the procedure is completed, the device should be
bones and soft tissues should be inspected for evidence of
tested and reprogrammed.
sternal wires, fractures, vertebral anomalies, or wide intercostal
Transcutaneous Pacing spaces, suggesting a prior thoracotomy. Sidedness, including the
Several devices that combine defi brillation/cardioversion capa- location of the gastric bubble, liver, and position and orientation
bilities and external pacing features are currently available. In of the cardiac mass, should be noted. Th e lung parenchyma
children, emergency transthoracic pacing may be considered as should be examined for evidence of focal consolidation, such as
a temporizing measure in those with symptomatic bradycar- pneumonia or atelectasis, as well as the pulmonary vascular
dia.254 Transcutaneous pacing has not been found to be eff ective markings. Pulmonary overcirculation or undercirculation helps
in the treatment of asystole in children.255 Pacing electrode size
should be selected according to patient size (usually patients
weighing less than 15 kg require smaller adhesive pads). Device
settings typically include pacing rate and power output. Seda-
tion may be necessary to tolerate soft tissue discomfort. Pro-
longed periods of transcutaneous pacing may result in local
cutaneous injury. In addition to monitoring for pacemaker
capture by ECG, ongoing clinical assessment of the adequacy of
cardiac output should be undertaken.
Implantable Cardioverter-Defi brillators
Th e primary goal of an implantable cardioverter-defi brillator
(ICD) is the prevention of sudden death in children at high
risk.247 Although sudden cardiac death is an uncommon occur-
rence in children, certain patients may be at particular high risk.
Individuals with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia,
long QT syndrome, and HCM and those with a history of near-
death events may be considered suitable candidates for pace-
maker/defi brillator implantation.248,256 Potential candidates also
include those with operated CHD and a history of malignant
arrhythmias.257 At the present time, the experience in the pedi-
atric age group with these devices has been limited and addi-
Figure 14-25. Chest radiograph in a neonate with apneic episodes
tional data are required to further refi ne guidelines for use,
undergoing evaluation to exclude potential cardiac etiology
address safety concerns, and evaluate long-term issues specifi c demonstrates the appearance of a poor inspiratory effort and a
to children.247,257-261 Th e anesthetic implications of implanted large cardiothymic silhouette, making the interpretation diffi cult.
units relate primarily to the potential for surgical electromag- No evidence of cardiac pathology was identifi ed in this infant.
320

14
Essentials of Cardiology
guide the diff erential diagnosis (see earlier discussion on physi-
ologic classifi cation of CHD).
Last, the cardiac silhouette and great vessels should be
assessed. In younger children the thymus may obscure the supe-
rior portions of the cardiac shadow. Careful inspection of the
cardiac silhouette includes an assessment of overall size and
evidence of individual chamber/vessel dilation (e.g., rightward
cardiac dilation on the posteroanterior fi lm indicating right
atrial enlargement or posterior enlargement on the lateral fi lm
suggesting left atrial dilation). Prominence of the main pulmo-
nary artery segment if present should be noted because it pro-
vides further evidence of the degree of pulmonary overcirculation
in left-to-right shunt lesions. Th e tracheal indentation can
usually be seen and is useful in determining aortic arch sided-
ness, although in a young child with a prominent thymus this
can be diffi cult to assess.
Perhaps more useful than an individual radiograph as a diag-
nostic tool, however, are serial chest fi lms used to monitor a
child’s cardiovascular status over time. In a young child with a
volume overload lesion such as a large septal defect, the child’s
physical examination and growth parameters coupled with the
degree of cardiomegaly and pulmonary overcirculation are more
helpful than other more advanced imaging techniques. Initia-
Figure 14-26. Lateral view of a barium swallow in a child with
tion and titration of pharmacologic therapy, as well as the timing
respiratory symptoms demonstrating a fi lling defect posteriorly in
of surgery, may also be guided by a plain chest radiograph. the midesophagus, consistent with an aberrant subclavian artery.
Barium Swallow
Th e current applications and uses of barium swallow studies in
the diagnosis of CHD are limited. To a large extent this modality windows in certain patient groups, such as those who have
has been replaced by MRI and chest tomography.265-267 In some undergone multiple cardiothoracic procedures, older individu-
cases, however, a barium esophagogram is used as an initial als, or children with a signifi cant amount of soft tissue/body fat.
screening tool when there is concern for the presence of a vas- For this reason, cardiovascular MRI is being increasingly used
cular ring, as in a child with medically refractory gastroesopha- for noninvasive imaging in certain subsets of children (see later).
geal refl ux, recurrent pneumonia, or stridor.268,269 Double aortic Additional challenges of echocardiography include the need to
arches represent one of the most common types of vascular ring obtain serial two-dimensional (2D) tomographic images by
in young children, but other types such as a right aortic arch sweeping the transducer scan in multiple planes to mentally
with an aberrant left subclavian artery and a left-sided ligamen- translate these images into three-dimensional (3D) structures,
tum arteriosus may also cause symptoms. Th e indentation and the need for expertise in the interpretation. Despite these
pattern in the barium column is consistent with the specifi c limitations, echocardiography remains the primary diagnostic
vascular anomaly (Fig. 14-26). imaging modality in most children and many medical and surgi-
cal management strategies are primarily based on the echocar-
Echocardiography diographic fi ndings.
Echocardiography is the diagnostic modality of choice for the A standard transthoracic echocardiogram consists of a two-
initial evaluation and serial assessment in most types of pediat- dimensional (2D) examination, M-mode imaging, and Doppler
ric heart disease. Using a variety of probes, ultrasound waves evaluation (color fl ow, pulsed-wave, continuous-wave modali-
are used to acquire real time images of cardiovascular struc- ties). Two-dimensional imaging provides structural assessment
tures. Various echocardiographic modalities are available, of the heart and adjacent vasculature. Cross-sectional images
including transthoracic,270 transesophageal,271-274 fetal,275,276 epi- are obtained from a number of windows that allow for excellent
cardial,277 intracardiac imaging,278 and intravascular ultra- anatomic detail in multiple planes (Video Clip 14-11). For the
sound.279 Each of these play important roles in the diagnostic transthoracic approach a typical examination includes the para-
evaluation and management of children with suspected or con- sternal, apical, subcostal, and suprasternal notch windows. In
fi rmed cardiovascular disease. most cases, this is adequate for a detailed segmental evaluation
Advantages of echocardiography include its noninvasive of the cardiac anatomy as described earlier. M-mode echocar-
nature, provision of excellent temporal and spatial resolution, diography allows for a one-dimensional imaging of the heart
generation of portable real-time images, cost-eff ectiveness, and with excellent temporal resolution (Fig. 14-27). It is otherwise
ease of use. As with any type of ultrasound, these waves are known as an “ice pick” view of the heart in real time. Unfortu-
transmitted well through homogeneous tissues and fl uid but nately, this technique only provides limited anatomic informa-
poorly through air and bone. In children with signifi cant pul- tion, and as such, is primarily used in the assessment of
monary disease, air-fi lled spaces (pneumothorax) and signifi - ventricular dimensions and function.
cant scar tissue image quality may be suboptimal. Another Color fl ow Doppler techniques allow for evaluation of both
limitation of echocardiography relates to limited acoustic directionality and velocity of blood fl ow. In addition to detecting
321

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
4:10:53 pm
45dB •/ 0/ •/2
3V2c 5sec
1 Dist = 5.04cm LVEDD H3.5MHz R0mm
ΔT = 0.000s Ped Heart
Slope = ****cm/s General
2 Dist = 2.93cm LVESD
ΔT = 0.046s Store in progress
0:01:47
Slope = 63.75cm/s
HR= 58bpm
Sweep=100mm/s
Cal=10mm
0
RV
1 IVS
2
LV
2
1
LVPW
130
Figure 14-27. M-mode echocardiography allows for determination of left ventricular dimensions and calculation of shortening fraction. RV,
right ventricle; IVS, interventricular septum; LV, left ventricle; LVPW, left ventricular posterior wall; LVEDD, left ventricular end-diastolic
dimension; LVESD, left ventricular end-systolic dimension.
fl ow across cardiac valves and great vessels, color fl ow imaging interventions are planned. Technologic advances in a number
allows detection of subtle lesions such as small septal defects of areas should allow for improved image quality and shorter
that can be diffi cult to identify by standard 2D imaging alone. acquisition times.
Traditionally, fl ow toward the transducer is displayed in red
whereas fl ow away is represented as blue. Turbulent blood fl ow
is associated with increased Doppler velocities and can be Practical Concepts Regarding the Interpretation of an
readily identifi ed as a mosaic of colors, typically of greenish tint Echocardiographic Report
(Video Clip 14-12).
Measurements of Cardiac Chambers and Vessel Dimensions
Pulsed- and continuous-wave Doppler represent spectral
A number of measurements are routinely performed during an
modalities that complement the color fl ow data and provide
echocardiographic examination. Th ese generally include ven-
quantitative information. Pulsed-wave interrogation is advanta-
tricular dimensions such as left ventricular end-diastolic (LVED)
geous in localizing specifi c sites of stenosis or turbulence but is
and end-systolic (LVES) dimensions, thickness of the interven-
limited in the magnitude of velocities it can detect. Continuous-
tricular septum and left ventricular posterior wall, as well as
wave Doppler, on the other hand, allows for quantifi cation
measurements of valve sizes and great artery dimensions. To
of much higher velocities (see Video Clip 14-12). By using
determine whether these are appropriate for the child being
velocities obtained with pulsed- and continuous-wave Doppler,
examined, the measurements are related to values obtained in
estimates of pressures within various cardiac chambers are pos-
normal children matched for body-surface area. In many centers
sible by applying the simplifi ed Bernoulli equation, which states
the reports include determinations of Z scores to indicate how
that the diff erence in pressure between two locations is approxi-
many standard deviations the observations are from mean
mately four times the square of the velocity of the jet of fl ow
values in a comparative population.
between them:
Pressure gradient (in mm Hg) = 4 × v2 Assessment of Ventricular Function
A number of echocardiographic techniques are able to provide
Th e applications of 3D echocardiography have been increas-
information regarding ventricular performance. Two of the
ingly investigated in the diagnosis of CHD.280-282 An examination
most commonly reported indices of ventricular systolic function
can provide clear and useful volumetric assessments when the
involve measurements of the extent of shortening, namely,
images are adequate. A signifi cant advantage of this imaging
shortening fraction and ejection fraction.
approach is that it is able to display cardiovascular structures
Shortening fraction (SF) represents the percent of change in
and their interrelationships in detail, in many cases facilitating
left ventricular diameter during the cardiac cycle. Th is is calcu-
the understanding of pathologic conditions over 2D imaging. It
lated using the following equation:
allows for an enhanced perspective of the margins and geometry
of abnormalities, such as septal defects and valvar anomalies. SF (%) = L VED dimension − LVES dimension/LVED
3D echocardiography may also be particularly useful when dimension
322

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Values range from 28% to 44%, with a normal mean value of Evaluation of Gradients
36%. Th is index, however, is dependent on ventricular preload Estimation of a peak instantaneous gradient is the most clini-
and afterload. cally useful method for quantifying the severity of obstructions
Ejection fraction (EF) is the fraction of blood ejected by the across semilunar valves and outfl ow tracts. It is derived by appli-
ventricle (stroke volume) relative to its end-diastolic volume. In cation of the simplifi ed Bernoulli equation. Th ese estimates
other words, it represents the percentage of blood ejected from when obtained across the pulmonary valve tend to have a higher
the left ventricle with each heart beat. Ejection fraction is correlation with catheterization peak-to-peak gradients than
derived by volumetric analysis of the left ventricle by means of those measured across the aortic valve, where mean gradients
the following equation: (obtained by automated integration of the velocities under a
spectral Doppler tracing) are found to have a higher correla-
EF (%) = LVEDV − LVESV/LVEDV tion.291 Th e mean gradient rather than a peak gradient as deter-
mined by Doppler echocardiography is considered a better
where LVEDV = left ventricular end-diastolic volume and indicator of the severity of the obstruction across atrioventricu-
LVESV = left ventricular end-systolic volume lar valves and other low-fl ow venous pathways.
Normal values vary in the literature but in most studies range
between 56% and 78%. A low ejection fraction is generally asso- Evaluation of Regurgitant Lesions
ciated with systolic functional impairment, but cardiac dysfunc- Although a number of echocardiographic parameters have been
tion may occur in the presence of a normal ejection fraction. investigated that may facilitate the evaluation of the severity of
Such may be the case of a child with diastolic heart failure. regurgitant lesions, in most pediatric cardiac centers this
It is important to also consider that although these functional remains largely a qualitative assessment. Th e severity of the
indices are routinely and easily obtained they have signifi cant pathology is usually characterized as mild, moderate, severe, or
limitations. Th e estimation of ejection fraction is based on geo- combinations thereof when there is overlap among these cate-
metric assumptions for the elliptical left ventricle. Th ese assump- gories. Serial echocardiographic assessment and comparative
tions thus may not be applicable to a systemic right ventricle data are clinically more meaningful than an isolated report.
or other types of ventricular geometries.283 Th ere has there-
fore been an escalating interest in newer echocardiographic Magnetic Resonance Imaging
approaches and imaging modalities that may provide more sen- Cardiovascular MRI/angiography has emerged in recent years
sitive and comprehensive information regarding ventricular as a complementary technology to other traditional imaging
performance, even in the absence of clinical disease. Some of modalities (Video Clips 14-14 and 14-15). Benefi ts have been
the newer techniques being used in the assessment of ventricu- reported in the assessment of complex pathology,292,294-298 delin-
lar function include (1) myocardial performance index (MPI), eation of systemic and pulmonary vascular anomalies,297,298
also known as the Tei index, which combines systolic and dia- evaluation of global and regional ventricular function,299 assess-
stolic intervals to assess global ventricular function284-286; (2) ment of myocardial viability,300 and characterization of pulmo-
Doppler tissue imaging (DTI) to evaluate intramural myocardial nary blood supply in children with structural alterations of the
velocities287; and (3) strain and strain rate imaging to quantitate pulmonary vascular tree.301 Particularly interesting applications
the rate of segmental myocardial deformation.288 Although that may further expand the utility of MRI in cardiovascular
values in normal children have been established for all of these medicine include the quantifi cation of left-to-right shunts302-304
imaging modalities and alterations in the presence of pathologic and measurement of blood oxygen saturation.305 Furthermore,
conditions have been described,289,290 additional studies docu- MRI has been found to be of benefi t for guiding interventions
menting their clinical applications in specifi c types of cardiovas- in pediatric heart disease.306-308 Most common indications in
cular pathology are needed. infants include assessment of complex cardiovascular malfor-
mations, delineation of vascular structures (aortic arch, systemic
and pulmonary venous drainage), evaluation of possible airway
Estimation of Pressures compression, and characterization of cardiac tumors. Despite
When the peak velocity of a tricuspid regurgitant jet is reported, the signifi cant technical challenges associated with the tech-
these data can be used to estimate right ventricular systolic nique in children, this imaging approach plays an important
pressure and thus pulmonary artery systolic pressure, in the diagnostic role. In adults with CHD, particularly in those with
absence of pulmonary stenosis or outfl ow obstruction (Video poor acoustic windows, this is frequently the imaging modality
Clip 14-13). If, for example, a peak regurgitant velocity of of choice. Th is may also be the case in children with palliated or
3 m/sec is recorded across the tricuspid valve, using the simpli- repaired CHD.
fi ed Bernoulli equation as discussed earlier, the pressure gradi- Although the temporal resolution of MRI is inferior to echo-
ent or diff erence between the right atrial and right ventricular cardiography, new sequences and techniques allow for real-time
systolic pressures can be estimated to be 4 × 32 = 36 mm Hg. If acquisition similar to that of fl uoroscopy. Spatial resolution con-
a normal right atrial pressure is assumed (4 to 6 mm Hg), this tinues to improve as well, particularly with the use of more
would predict a right ventricular systolic pressure of approxi- powerful magnets. An important aspect in the acquisition of
mately 40 mm Hg. Similarly, if the peak or maximal fl ow veloc- MRI data with high spatial resolution is the use of both cardiac
ity across a ventricular septal defect is measured at 4.5 msec, and respiratory gating to allow sampling during only specifi c
this predicts a pressure gradient of 4 × 4.52 = 81 mm Hg between portions of the cardiac and respiratory cycles. Slow heart rates
the ventricles, implying that the defect is pressure restrictive and and low respiratory rates facilitate this process. MRI, in contrast
the right ventricular and pulmonary artery systolic pressures are to CT, does not involve radiation exposure, making it preferable
relatively low. for serial examinations that many young children with cardio-
323

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
vascular pathology require. However, MRI examinations are minimal or not necessary. With multislice CT detectors, a com-
associated with the need for multiple anesthetics and their plete CT of the thorax can be performed in less than 10 seconds;
inherent risks. and as new 64-slice detectors become increasingly available, the
Because of the nature of the magnetic fi elds generated in time required for the study will continue to shorten. A signifi -
MRI, the presence of several types of metal, including pacemak- cant drawback of CT is the signifi cant radiation burden, although
ers, ICDs, cerebrovascular clips/coils, or recently implanted typically estimated to be similar or slightly higher than a diag-
intracardiac or intravascular coils and devices, are considered nostic cardiac catheterization, and the likely need for iodinated
contraindications. Some artifi cial devices such as vascular clips, contrast agents with their concomitant risks.
intravascular stents, and atrial septal defect occluder devices are Cardiac CT is not as accurate as MRI for delineation of intra-
typically made of titanium, allowing for sequences to be acquired cardiac anatomy, but it provides excellent spatial resolution and
that minimize the artifact produced by the foreign material. information on extracardiac vasculature. CT has been reported
Stainless steel, on the other hand, as is found in coils used for to be of benefi t in the evaluation of aortic arch anomalies and
occlusion of collateral vessels or a patent ductus arteriosus, gen- vascular rings, as well as in defi ning the systemic and pulmonary
erates signifi cant artifacts within the study. venous returns. In adult patients, multislice CT provides excel-
An additional limitation of MRI is the need for patient immo- lent information on coronary arteries and the presence of ath-
bility during long examinations for optimal image quality. In erosclerotic disease; but in infants and children with smaller
small children this requirement usually necessitates the use of vessels and more rapid heart rates, these images are more diffi -
deep sedation/general anesthesia.309-311 In infants with complex, cult to obtain.
and often cyanotic, CHD, specialists skilled in the care of chil-
dren with cardiovascular pathology are often asked to provide Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography
care during the procedures. Th e severity of the cardiovascular Cardiac catheterization involves the invasive measurement of
disease may add to the challenges presented to the anesthesia intracardiac/vascular pressures and blood oxygen saturation
care provider in a remote location.312,313 Th e lengthy nature of coupled with angiography to assess cardiac anatomy and hemo-
the studies and the signifi cant time requirements to perform dynamics (Figs. 14-29 and 14-30). Before the era of 2D echocar-
postprocessing of the images cause MRI to be much more time diography, cardiac catheterization was frequently used for
intensive for the interpreting physician than other noninvasive diagnostic purposes. At the present time, with the advances in
imaging modalities. noninvasive imaging, diagnostic procedures represent a rela-
A signifi cant advantage to this technique is avoidance of tively small proportion of these studies. Current indications for
harmful radiation inherent to traditional catheterization tech- cardiac catheterization at most centers include (1) the assess-
niques. As MRI technology improves, with faster scans, increas- ment of physiologic parameters such as pressure and resistance
ing availability, and decreasing cost, it will continue to play an data, (2) anatomic defi nition when other diagnostic modali-
increasing role in the diagnosis and longitudinal follow-up of ties are inadequate, (3) need for electrophysiologic testing/
congenital and acquired pediatric heart disease. treatment, and (4) when interventions are anticipated.
Th e majority of catheterizations in the current era involve
Computed Tomography interventions, ranging from endomyocardial biopsies, to angio-
Cardiac computed tomography (CT), with or without ECG plasties and stenting of stenotic vessels, dilation of valves, and
gating, has also become an option among the battery of imag- conduits, to occlusion techniques for both native defects such
ing modalities available to the pediatric cardiologist (Fig. as a patent ductus arteriosus, septal defects, or fi stulous connec-
14-28).292,296,314,315 Th e major advantage of CT over MRI is the tions and surgically created defects such as Fontan fenestrations
very rapid scan times, such that, in most children, sedation is (Fig. 14-31, Video Clip 14-16, see Chapter 20). In some cases,
Figure 14-28. These two CT images display the details of the aortic arch anatomy in an infant with severe aortic arch obstruction.
324

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Blalock-Tausig Shunt
44%
xx
57%
53%
20/13
m=8 xx m=16
77%
77%
a = 6
v = 5
51/0,4 m = 5
68%
58/20
m = 33
74%
Arrows indicate catheter course
Wt 3.3 KG
Diagnosis:
1. Heterotaxy
2. Dextrocardia
3. Complete atrioventricular canal
4. Double outlet right ventricle
5. Pulmonary stenosis, severe
6. L-transposition of the great arteries
7. Interrupted inferior vena cava with azygous continuation
8. Status post innominate to main pulmonary artery shunt
9. Right pulmonary artery isolation
Figure 14-29. Cardiac catheterization. Diagram illustrating the structural abnormalities in a child with complex cardiovascular pathology.
Data routinely obtained at cardiac catheterization are depicted, including oxygen saturation determinations, pressure measurements, and
hemodynamic calculations. These types of pictorial representations are extremely helpful when caring for children with complex defects.
such as might be the case of critically ill neonates with complex ment of blood fl ows and other calculations (i.e., shunts).316 Addi-
heart disease, catheter-based interventions such as balloon atrial tional data that may be obtained include pressure gradients,
septostomy and other procedures can be lifesaving. cardiac output measurements, and parameters to derive vascu-
In most children, access to the central circulation is accom- lar resistances and valve areas.
plished percutaneously via the femoral approach. Th ose with Fluoroscopy and cineangiography are essential components
occluded femoral veins or with cavopulmonary connections of most cardiac catheterizations studies. Of the two, cineangi-
may require venous access through an internal jugular vein. In ography accounts for the majority of the radiation exposure
general, most examinations involve hemodynamic evaluation during the procedure as images are recorded during the injec-
with recording of pressure data through catheters positioned at tion of contrast material typically at 15 or 30 frames per second.317
various sites of interest. Oxygen saturation data are obtained by Most angiograms are obtained during biplane imaging by posi-
refl ectance oximetry or blood gas measurement from various tioning the equipment to obtain optimal views that allow for
cardiac chambers and vessels. It is important to recognize that delineation of the pathology in question (axial angiography)
in contrast to the oxygen saturation calculations derived from a (Video Clip 14-17).318,319
blood gas analysis, refl ectance oximetry assessments are actually Although cardiac catheterization has evolved over the years
measured values. Th is allows for the determination of oxygen providing improved safety, it is an invasive procedure involving
content (total amount of hemoglobin in the blood) and, when a number of risks and potential for morbidity and mortality,
combined with values of oxygen consumption, for the assess- albeit relatively small. Risks associated with cardiac catheteriza-
325

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
I
II
ART (100)
PA (100)
ART (100)
ART
PA
ART
On oxygen
Figure 14-30. Cardiac catheterization pressure recording displays a typical hemodynamic tracing (scales are the same for both pressures).
Note that the pulmonary artery systolic pressures are at systemic levels in this child with multiple left-sided obstructions. ART, systemic
arterial pressure; PA, pulmonary artery pressure.
A B C
D E F
Figure 14-31. Catheter-based procedures. Upper panel: (A), balloon atrial septostomy; (B), blade atrial septostomy; (C), mitral balloon
valvuloplasty. Lower panel: (D), placement of ductal occluder device; (E), transcatheter closure of secundum atrial septal defect;
(F), pulmonary artery dilation with stent placement.
326

14
Essentials of Cardiology
it nio fen
c
tin ioc nlu
,
d are
r
he yx tc he mssi iv ae
s,
b vl ao so cd
u
lalo r/s cs a, rv da is ac cu pla er
r
fc oo ram tip ol nic ,3a 2t 2i o syn ss t, e32 m0,3 i2 c1 Q(cid:2) p/Q(cid:2) s=( (S Pa Vo o2− −M PAV oo
2
))
air embolization, myocardial ischemia, and those associated 2 2
with the administration of contrast agents. Th ese are more likely where Sao = systemic arterial O saturation, MVo = mixed
to occur in infants and small children.323 Although transient venous O 2 saturation, PVo = pulm2 onary venous O s2 aturation,
2 2 2
increases in body temperature may occur after a study, the inci- and PAo = pulmonary arterial O saturation.
dence of endocarditis is extremely rare. Interventional catheter- . 2 . 2
A Qp : Qs ratio that exceeds 3 : 1 is considered a signifi cant
izations, by the nature of the procedures, are associated with a
shunt, although smaller ratios may be associated with signifi cant
greater rate of complications. However, as transcatheter inter-
symptomatology.
ventions become safer and more eff ective, an increasing number
of children may obviate the need for surgery, often undergoing
Cardiac Output Determinations
procedures on an outpatient basis.324 New techniques continue
Th e volume of blood ejected by the heart into the systemic cir-
to evolve in this fi eld, such as the percutaneous placement of
culation, or cardiac output, can be derived in several ways.
valves,325 strategies that combine cardiac catheterization and
Th ermodilution measurements use saline as an indicator to
surgical intervention, so-called hybrid procedures,326-328 and
measure pulmonary blood fl ow. In the absence of intracardiac
catheter-based interventions during fetal life.329
shunts this is equivalent to the systemic blood fl ow or cardiac
output (expressed as liters per minute). In the Fick method,
Practical Concepts Regarding the Interpretation of a oxygen is used as an indicator and cardiac output is obtained by
Cardiac Catheterization Report the application of the following formula:
.
Pressure Data Qs (L/min) = Vo 2 (L/min)/Sao 2 content − MVo 2 content
Atrial pressure tracings are characterized by several waves (a, c, where Vo = oxygen consumption (assumed or measured), Sao
2 2
and v waves) and descents (x and y). Th e right atrial pressure is = systemic arterial O content, MVo = mixed venous O content,
2 2 2
typically “a” wave dominant. Th e mean right atrial pressure is and O content = O saturation × (1.36 × 10 × hemoglobin
2 2
normally less than 5 mm Hg. In the presence of signifi cant tri-
concentration).
cuspid valve regurgitation or a junctional rhythm, the “v” wave
becomes the dominant wave. Th e left atrial pressure tracing in
Vascular Resistances
contrast to the right atrium, displays “v” wave dominance, which
Resistance represents the change in pressure in the systemic or
is accentuated during mitral regurgitation. Th e mean left atrial
pulmonary circulation with respect to fl ow. Th is is expressed as
pressure rarely exceeds 8 mm Hg. Th e reported values for atrial
mm Hg/L/min (Wood units) and is usually normalized for body
pressures correspond to the “a” and “v” waves and mean pres-
surface area.
sures. Ventricular pressures are recorded and reported during
Th e systemic (SVR) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
systole, at end systole, and at end diastole. For the right ventricle
are derived as follows:
the systolic pressure is normally in the 25- to 30-mm Hg range, .
with end-diastolic pressure of 5 to 7 mm Hg. Th e systolic pres- SVR = (aortic mean pressure − right atrial mean pressure)/Qs
sure in the left ventricle normally increases with age and should PVR = (pulmonary artery mean pressure − pulmonary
equal the systolic arterial pressure; the end-diastolic pressure is .
capillary wedge pressure or left atrial pressure)/Qp
typically less than 10 mm Hg. Th e pulmonary artery pressure is
reported in terms of systolic, diastolic, and mean pressures. Th e
systolic pulmonary artery pressure in a normal child should be
equal to the right ventricular systolic pressure, and the mean Considerations in the Perioperative
pulmonary artery pressure should not exceed 20 mm Hg. Th e
Care of Children with
pulmonary artery wedge pressure is obtained by advancing a
catheter into a distal vessel until this is occluded, refl ecting the Cardiovascular Disease
left atrial pressure. Th e aortic pressure and contour of the
tracing varies depending of the site of interrogation. Typically, General Issues
there is an increase in the systolic pressure as the catheter navi- Th e anesthetic care of children with heart disease330 is chal-
gates toward the peripheral circulation. Th is phenomenon is lenged by the following factors:
known as “pulse wave amplifi cation.” ● Th e remarkable spectrum of disease, from structural defects
Pressure gradients represent the diff erences between two dis- to acquired pathology
tinct sites and can be measured in a number of ways (mean ● Th e wide range of congenital lesions and their underlying
gradient and peak gradient). It is important to consider that a physiologic consequences
number of factors may aff ect the determination of pressure ● Th e numerous surgical procedures in CHD (Table 14-4) and
gradients. Th e fl ow across the lesion is signifi cantly infl uenced their hemodynamic implications
by the severity of the obstruction and the ventricular function. ● Th e fact that many parents are unaware of the full extent or
details of their child’s lesion or abnormalities
Shunt Calculations At the same time, to optimally care for these patients the
Shunts are characterized in terms of their direction (left-to- following objectives should be met:
right, right-to-left, bidirectional) and magnitude. Left-to-right ● Familiarity with the cardiovascular pathology
shunts can be quantifi ed based on the ratio of the pulmonary ● Understanding of the physiologic abnormalities and available
. .
(Qp) to systemic (Qs) blood fl ow ratio as follows: therapies
327

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
Table 14-4. Surgical Procedures for Congenital Heart Disease
Procedure Description Goal/Result
Arterial switch (Jatene) operation Arterial trunks transected above the level Establishes the normal ventricular-arterial connection
of the semilunar valves, relocated to their (right ventricle to pulmonary artery and left ventricle
appropriate respective ventricles, coronary to aorta)
arteries reimplanted into the neoaortic
root
Atrioventriculoseptal defect Patch closure of atrial and ventricular Eliminates the intracardiac shunt
(atrioventricular canal) repair communications, reconstruction of
atrioventricular valves, closure of cleft in
left-sided atrioventricular valve
Blalock-Taussig shunt Subclavian artery to pulmonary artery Allows for or increases pulmonary blood fl ow
communication. Modifi ed implies
placement of a graft.
Central shunt, Waterston shunt, Creation of communication between Allows for or increases pulmonary blood fl ow
Pott shunt systemic and pulmonary circulations
Closure of septal defects Patch or primary closure of Eliminates the intracardiac shunt
communications at the atrial or ventricular
levels
Coarctation repair Relief of aortic arch obstruction (various Establishes patency across the aortic arch
approaches)
Damus-Kaye-Stansel End-to-side anastomosis of main Allows for unobstructed systemic outfl ow in the
pulmonary artery onto the aorta. context of single ventricle associated with obstruction
Necessitates reestablishing pulmonary to aortic fl ow or other settings
blood fl ow via an alternative route (graft
from a systemic artery into the pulmonary
artery or a right ventricular to pulmonary
artery conduit)
Division/ligation of patent Obliteration of the ductus arteriosus Eliminates shunting at the level of the great arteries
ductus arteriosus
Fontan procedure Connection that allows for inferior vena Separates the pulmonary and systemic circulations in
cava blood to drain into pulmonary patients with single ventricle physiology. Usually fi nal
circulation step in the single-ventricle palliation pathway.
Glenn anastomosis Superior vena cava to pulmonary artery Provides for pulmonary blood fl ow while unloading
(cavopulmonary connection) direct anastomosis (bidirectional implies the single ventricle. May be fi rst or intermediate step
fl ow from superior vena cava into both in the single-ventricle palliation pathway.
pulmonary arteries)
Konno-Rastan procedure Enlargement of the left ventricular Alleviates subvalvar and valvar aortic obstruction.
(aortoventriculoplasty) outfl ow tract and aortic annulus. The When the aortic root is replaced by an autologous
defect created in the ventricular septum pulmonary root this is referred to as a Ross-Konno.
to enlarge the outfl ow tract is repaired Alternatively, cryopreserved homograft tissue may be
with a large patch. used in the form of an extended root replacement.
Norwood procedure (stage I Involves aortic reconstruction, an atrial Addresses systemic outfl ow tract obstruction by
palliation) septectomy, and placement of a systemic- allowing the right ventricle to eject into a
to-pulmonary artery shunt reconstructed aorta. The atrial septectomy provides
for unobstructed drainage of the pulmonary venous
return into the right atrium. The systemic-to-
pulmonary artery shunt supplies the pulmonary blood
fl ow.
Pulmonary artery banding Constrictive band placed around main Limits excessive pulmonary blood fl ow
pulmonary artery
Rastelli operation Creation of an intracardiac tunnel that Allows for the left ventricle to eject solely into the
allows for left ventricular output into the aorta at the same time as it abolishes the intracardiac
aorta while closing a ventricular septal shunting at the ventricular level and provides for
defect and placement of a right unobstructed pulmonary blood fl ow. The procedure
ventricular conduit to pulmonary artery results in separation of the pulmonary and systemic
circulations.
328

14
Essentials of Cardiology
Table 14-4 (continued). Surgical Procedures for Congenital Heart Disease
Procedure Description Goal/Result
Sano modifi cation of the Placement of graft between the right Provides for pulmonary blood fl ow
Norwood procedure ventricle and main pulmonary artery as an
alternative to a modifi ed Blalock-Taussig
shunt in the Norwood operation
Senning/Mustard procedure Intra-atrial baffl e procedure Allows for pulmonary venous blood to be rerouted
(atrial switch) through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle (as
the systemic chamber that ejects into the aorta). At
the same time the systemic venous return is
channeled across the mitral valve into the left
ventricle, which pumps into the main pulmonary
artery.
Tetralogy of Fallot repair Closure of ventricular septal defect and Eliminates intracardiac shunting at the ventricular
relief of right ventricular outfl ow tract level (cyanosis) and addresses the right ventricular
obstruction outfl ow tract obstruction (frequently at several levels)
Truncus arteriosus repair Closure of the ventricular septal defect Abolishes the intracardiac shunting and restores the
and establishment of right ventricular to normal connection between the ventricles and great
pulmonary artery continuity (usually via a arteries
homograft)
Valvectomy Valve excision Relieves valvar obstruction
Valvotomy Opening of stenotic valve Relieves valvar obstruction
Valve replacement Placement of bioprosthetic or mechanical Addresses valvar pathology (obstruction and/or
valve regurgitation)
Valvuloplasty Valve repair Relieves valvar regurgitation and/or stenosis
● Recognition of compensatory mechanisms, signs of limited the nature of the procedure, complexity of the disease, and
reserve, and potential perioperative risks potential impact on perioperative outcome, additional evalua-
● Ability to identify the potential impact of the scheduled tion and/or diagnostic studies may be warranted. In many cases,
intervention/surgical procedure on the patient’s underlying the anesthesiologist plays a major role in the determination of
condition and anticipate how this will be tolerated whether the available information is adequate.
Th e combination of the daunting challenges and diffi cult A fundamental goal in the preoperative evaluation is the
objectives can be intimidating even to the most experienced identifi cation of children who are at increased risk because of
clinician. Th us, when caring for children with cardiovascular cardiac and pulmonary limitations imposed by their cardiovas-
disease, an interdisciplinary approach is desirable and highly cular disease. After the preoperative visit, the anesthesiologist
recommended, allowing for the formulation and execution of caring for a child with CHD should have an adequate under-
optimal management plans. If available, consultation with the standing of the pathophysiology of the cardiac defect and impli-
child’s cardiologist or primary care physician should include cations of any previous interventions. Abnormal indices that
inquiries about the details of the child’s disease, overall clinical should raise potential concerns include hypoxemia (Spo less
. 2 .
status, past and current medical treatment, prior surgical inter- than 75%), pulmonary to systemic blood fl ow ratio (Qp : Qs)
ventions, and presence of residual pathology. Th e interaction exceeding 3 : 1, outfl ow tract gradients over 50 mm Hg, pulmo-
between members of the perioperative team should allow the nary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure above
opportunity for an exchange of information, discussion of con- 30 mm Hg), increased pulmonary vascular resistance index (>2
cerns, and recommendations that may facilitate patient care as Woods units · m2) or polycythemia (hematocrit >60%). In addi-
well as the development of comprehensive care plans.331 Th is is tion, the following clinical states may place children at signifi -
particularly important in the management of children with cant risk for severe cardiopulmonary decompensation during
complex pathologic processes. anesthesia and surgery: history of recent congestive heart failure,
A complete medical history and focused examination is uncontrolled arrhythmias, severe ventricular dysfunction, unex-
essential during the preoperative assessment. In addition to pro- plained syncope, substantial exercise intolerance, or any condi-
viding the opportunity for evaluation of the child’s disease pro- tion associated with signifi cant functional cardiac or pulmonary
cesses, overall clinical status, and functional reserve, this allows impairment.
for appraisal of issues that may aff ect anesthetic management
(limited vascular access, diffi cult airway, gastroesophageal Clinical Condition and Status of Prior Repair
refl ux, manipulations to manage pulmonary and systemic blood Children with CHD may present for anesthetic care before
fl ow and pressures). Available diagnostic studies should be catheter-based or surgical interventions for their cardiovascular
reviewed (e.g., ECG, chest radiograph, echocardiogram, Holter disease or after palliation or defi nitive procedures. It is impor-
monitor, cardiac catheterization). On occasion, depending on tant to recognize that true “corrective procedures” are those that
329

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children
result in a normal life expectancy and normal cardiovascular include those with residual signifi cant pathology; suspected or
reserve.332 Th ey generally require no further medical or surgical known pulmonary hypertension, single-ventricle physiology
treatment. As such, only a few procedures fulfi ll these criteria: (including patients post Norwood procedures, Glenn opera-
ligation/division/occlusion of a patent ductus arteriosus and tions, or Fontan palliations), and after conduit placement or
closure of an isolated secundum atrial septal defect. Other inter- cardiac transplantation (see Chapters 15, 16, and 21).
ventions or surgical procedures may result in repair or “correc-
tion,” however not necessarily in normal hemodynamics or life Summary
expectancy. In fact, some assume limitation in cardiovascular
reserve and the need for close follow-up, further medical man- Caring for children with heart disease is a major aspect of
agement, and potential or additional surgical therapies. In other pediatric anesthesia practice. Th e spectrum of pathology in
cases, as in children with palliated CHD, the circulation may still the pediatric age group includes a wide range of structural
be abnormal. Th ese individuals have been reported to be at a defects as well as varied acquired diseases. Th e ability to provide
greater risk of adverse perioperative events.333-335 optimal care is dependent on an understanding of the basic
Th e eff ect or impact to the heart and other systems during pathophysiology of the lesions; familiarity with the commonly
previous procedures also requires careful consideration. A used diagnostic modalities and their clinical applications;
number of problems may remain or develop after surgical inter- and medical and surgical treatment options available to aff ected
vention. Th ese include residual shunts, valvar stenoses or individuals. In this chapter we have presented basic concepts
outfl ow tract obstruction, valvar regurgitation, pulmonary in cardiology that may enhance the overall knowledge of
hypertension, arrhythmias, and ventricular dysfunction. Chil- the practicing anesthesiologist in pediatric cardiovascular
dren who require a detailed appraisal of perioperative risks disease.
Annotated References
Hata T, Todd MM: Cervical spine considerations when anesthetiz- Th e study assessed changes in ventricular function in response to two
ing patients with Down syndrome. Anesthesiology 2005; 102: anesthetic regimens in single-ventricle patients using recently
680-685 described echocardiographic indices (myocardial performance index
Th e review stresses the need for careful preoperative evaluation in chil- and Doppler tissue imaging).
dren with Down syndrome to identify symptomatic patients with Lang RM, Mor-Avi V, Sugeng L, et al: Th ree-dimensional echocardiog-
cervical spine anomalies. raphy: the benefi ts of the additional dimension. J Am Coll Cardiol
Jeff eries JL, Denfi eld SW, Price JF, et al: A prospective evaluation of 2006; 48:2053-2069
nesiritide in the treatment of pediatric heart failure. Pediatr Cardiol Th e article focuses on the benefi ts of 3D echocardiography, the realistic
2006; 27:402-407 and unique comprehensive views of cardiac valves and congenital
Th e study evaluated the potential role of recombinant B-type natriuretic abnormalities; and the utility in the intraoperative and postoperative
peptide (nesiritide) for the treatment of pediatric decompensated settings.
heart failure. Nesiritide was associated with improved urine output Samyn MM: A review of the complementary information available with
and functional status, supporting its application in the treatment of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and multi-slice computed
pediatric heart failure. tomography (CT) during the study of congenital heart disease. Int
Ikemba CM, Su JT, Stayer SA, et al: Myocardial performance index J Cardiovasc Imaging 2004; 20:569-578
with sevofl urane-pancuronium versus fentanyl-midazolam- Th e review highlights the applications of cardiac magnetic resonance
pancuronium in infants with a functional single ventricle. Anes- imaging and computed tomography (CT) in the diagnosis of congeni-
thesiology 2004; 101:1298-1305 tal heart disease.
References
Please see www.expertconsult.com
330
