=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:40:05.114160",
  "file_size_bytes": 351851,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
Ashley EA, Niebauer J. Cardiology Explained. London: Remedica; 2004.
Chapter 6 Hypertension
Background
Approximately one in four adults in the western world suffers from hypertension. Of these, 32%
are not aware that they have it, 15% are not on any therapy, and 26% are on inadequate therapy.
Only 27% are receiving adequate therapy.
Hypertension is a difficult condition to manage because patients are generally asymptomatic and
treatment is preventative rather than palliative. Convincing patients of the need for poorly
tolerated medication in the face of well-being is one of the challenges confronting clinicians
involved in improving the cardiovascular morbidity and mortality caused by high blood pressure
(BP). If untreated, hypertension has serious consequences, including renal disease, myocardial
infarction (MI), and cerebrovascular accident. However, many patients do not receive sufficiently
aggressive management.
Definition
There is no natural cut-off between normal and high BP. As a result, many threshold values for
treatment have been proposed. Table 1 provides a synthesis of guidelines from the major bodies.
Accurate BP measurements are complicated by several factors. For example, there is an
approximately 12/7 mm Hg difference between BP measurements taken in the clinic and those
taken at home – and in many patients it can be significantly more. Similarly, measurements in the
clinic cannot control for a large element of random biological variation, diurnal variation, and
variation due to chance stress (eg, stress due to being in a traffic jam on the way to the clinic).
Consequently, it is recommended that at least three readings are taken.
Table 1
Guidelines for threshold values between normal and high
blood pressure.
The annual risk of death from cardiovascular disease (including stroke) or coronary artery
disease can be calculated from the European Society of Cardiology tables or Framingham risk
tables. Some bodies recommend that mild hypertensives should only be treated if their
cardiovascular risk exceeds 2% per year. This consideration of individual risk is welcome, since
until recently most clinical trials have involved head-to-head comparisons of monotherapy,
whereas in practice most patients require combination therapy.
Causes
No cause is identified in 95% of hypertension patients. However, awareness of treatable causes is
important, especially in younger patients in whom there is a higher probability of the
hypertension being secondary to some other cause. Causes of secondary hypertension are
outlined in Table 2.
Table 2
Causes of secondary hypertension.
Assessment
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 1/9
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
History
History-taking is straightforward since, in most cases, hypertension is asymptomatic. However,
symptoms can include headaches, transient ischemic attacks, mild visual disturbances, epistaxes,
exertional dyspnea (if heart failure has developed), angina, claudication, weight gain (in
Cushing's syndrome), nocturia, and hematuria (with renal disease).
A full drug history is important and must include pharmacologically active preparations such as
the combined contraceptive pill and herbal remedies, which are often not regarded by patients as
drugs. Other important medications are steroids, sympathomimetics (eg, in cold cures), and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which can reduce the antihypertensive effect of
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) and β-blockers.
As with any cardiovascular disease, risk factors should be especially well documented. As full a
family tree as possible should be drawn to document hypertension, diabetes, or early cardiac
death. A history of smoking and physical activity should also be taken. More specific to
hypertension, caffeine and alcohol intake should be recorded and some insight into diet and
lifestyle stress should be acquired.
Examination
The physical examination has three specific objectives:
documenting an accurate BP
excluding possible secondary causes
quantifying end-organ damage
The BP should be measured in both arms, with the arm and manometer at the patient's heart
level. Readings should be taken manually in a standardized way (most clinical trials use
Korotkoff I and V – from the first sound heard to the complete disappearance of sounds). The use
of a large-diameter cuff is essential in those with large arms.
The general appearance of the patient may suggest Cushing's syndrome, a thyroid disorder,
polycystic ovarian disease, sleep apnea, or acromegaly. All peripheral pulses should be taken to
screen for vascular disease, but special attention should be paid, especially in young people, to
radiofemoral delay (diminished and late pulses in the femoral arteries), which suggests aortic
coarctation. If positive, the BP should be measured in all four limbs. Auscultation should also be
carried out over the aorta and renal arteries for bruits suggestive of stenosis. Abdominal
examination may reveal palpable kidneys in polycystic disease or a pheochromocytoma.
End-organ damage can be detected by palpation of the apex beat, detection of bibasal crackles,
and examination of the fundi. Diagnosis of hypertensive retinopathy is based on a four-stage
grading system, as outlined in Table 3.
Table 3
Stages of hypertensive retinopathy (Keith–Wagener
classification).
Investigations
Investigations are aimed at diagnosing rare secondary causes and quantifying end-organ damage.
Only electrolytes, creatinine, fasting glucose, and lipids should be requested in every patient. A
low potassium and raised sodium level suggests hyperaldosteronism – either primary (Conn's
syndrome) or secondary to renal artery stenosis. This should prompt measurement of renin and
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 2/9
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
aldosterone levels. It should be noted that the potassium level is normal in 50% of cases of
primary hyperaldosteronism.
Raised calcium levels suggest possible hyperparathyroidism. If the symptoms suggest a thyroid
problem, thyroid function should be tested. A low threshold should be adopted for the following:
renal ultrasound
urine microscopy (for casts and cells – glomerulonephritis)
urine samples for testing:
catecholamine metabolites (three samples, one every 24 hours, required in acid
bottles)
urinary free cortisol (one sample in a plain bottle – this can also be used for
glomerular filtration rate and 24-hour protein tests)
Once hypertension has caused end-organ damage, the risks associated with any given level of BP
are higher. Evidence of end-organ damage should therefore be sought in all patients. Dip-stick
urinalysis, tests for urea and electrolytes, and a renal ultrasound can reveal renal insufficiency.
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) can be readily detected by electrocardiography or
echocardiography (a chest x-ray is rarely necessary). Hypertension with LVH carries a
particularly poor prognosis (the 5-year mortality is around 30%–40%) and is a powerful
predictor of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.
A useful tool, both for generalists and specialists, is the 24-hour ambulatory BP recording. It is
particularly useful when clinic measurements show variability, with resistant hypertension, or
most commonly to diagnose "white coat" hypertension. An ambulatory BP measurement
(ABPM) is not required for those who are at high risk already, either because of target organ
damage or cardiovascular complications. Such patients can be treated on the basis of clinic
measurements. Equally, an evidence-based approach suggests that those with mild hypertension,
no target organ damage, and low estimated risk may be left untreated (but followed) without
ABPM.
Management
Many randomized controlled trials have shown that BP reduction prevents the complications of
hypertension. Early trials showed a significant improvement in the risk of stroke, but little or no
reduction in coronary heart disease (CHD) events. Later trials, particularly those in the elderly,
have also shown a reduction in CHD events, although the benefit is not as great as observational
studies predicted. A summary of hypertensive treatments is shown in Table 4.
Table 4
Summary of hypertensive treatment.
Lifestyle change
Lifestyle changes are important in the management of patients with hypertension and can be used
alone during an initial period for those with mild hypertension and low risk.
Increasing fruit and vegetable intake can improve BP via an effect on potassium; in combination
with a low-fat diet, this can reduce BP by up to 11/6 mm Hg. In addition, weight loss is
associated with an approximately 2.5/1.5 mm Hg drop for each kilogram lost. Specific advice on
abstaining from adding salt to food – during cooking and at the table – should be given to reduce
salt intake to 1 teaspoon per day. Foods such as bread, stock cubes, and breakfast cereals are
often surprisingly high in salt. Reducing salt intake can cut BP by approximately 5/3 mm Hg.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 3/9
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
Alcohol, particularly when taken in a binge pattern, is associated with increased risk. The current
American Heart Association guidelines state: "If an individual chooses to consume alcohol, the
limit should be one drink [ie, half a pint of beer, one glass of wine, or one short drink] a day for
women and two drinks a day for men. People who do not normally drink alcohol should not
begin drinking." Regular exercise (walking rather than weight training), stopping smoking, and
limiting caffeine intake can all assist in lowering BP and may independently reduce cardiac risk.
Pharmacotherapy
In most patients, altering lifestyle factors is not enough. For these people, there is the difficult
balance of pharmacotherapy. Fewer than half of all hypertensive patients can be controlled on
monotherapy, whilst one third require three or more drugs. Knowledge of the mechanisms of
action of antihypertensives is important as it allows rational combinations to be chosen based on
complementary mechanisms of action.
There are four major groups of drug treatments for hypertension and several less frequently used
classes. The sites of action of these antihypertensive agents are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Major physiological mechanisms of antihypertensives. See
Figure 2 for details of centrally acting hypertensives. ACE:
angiotensin-converting enzyme; AT: angiotensin.
Beta-blockers
Beta-adrenoreceptor blockers have been used for many decades in the treatment of hypertension
and are one of the few classes of agents that have been proven to reduce mortality. They work by
reducing cardiac output via negative inotropic and chronotropic actions. In addition, they block
sympathetic nervous system stimulation of renin release by juxtaglomerular cells. As with all
medications, their use is limited primarily by adverse effects. Asthma is generally considered to
be an absolute contraindication, even with agents selective for the cardiovascular system (β -
1
receptors). Peripheral vascular disease and bradycardia are relative contraindications. In
susceptible patients, heart block and heart failure may be initiated.
The most commonly reported adverse effect is lethargy, and nightmares can occur with lipid-
soluble β-blockers. As with all antihypertensives, erectile dysfunction (ED) is a problem. The
best guide as to whether ED is iatrogenic is to determine whether the symptoms appeared
suddenly. Nevertheless, β-blockers have significant advantages in patients with coexistent angina
and anxiety, and also after MI.
Diuretics
Thiazide diuretics, such as bendrofluazide, are another class of agent for which randomized
controlled trial evidence indicates an improvement in survival, and should be the first-line drug
in the elderly and in those with systolic hypertension. They work by inhibiting NaCl reabsorption
+
in the distal tubule. This initially leads to an increase in Na loss and a reduction in plasma
volume. However, the plasma volume soon recovers, leaving a reduced total peripheral
resistance, for which the mechanism is unknown. Thiazide diuretics are widely used and very
cheap, with a moderate side-effect profile (most commonly hypokalemia, dyslipidemia, and
gout). Potassium levels should be checked regularly.
Loop diuretics have a role to play in the place of thiazides when renal function is compromised
(creatinine >180 μmol/L or 2 mg/dL) and on a short-term basis, in addition to thiazides, in
resistant hypertension, where a significant proportion of patients suffer plasma volume overload.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 4/9
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
Calcium-channel blockers
A large number of calcium-channel blockers have been developed and there is good evidence of
their ability to reduce BP. There are three subclasses: the dihydropyridines (nifedipine-like), the
phenylalkylamine derivatives (verapamil), and the benzothiazepines (diltiazem). All work by
blocking the entry of calcium into the smooth muscle cells of resistance vessels, thereby causing
vasodilatation. Dihydropyridines cause vasodilatation without the bradycardic and negatively
inotropic effects of diltiazem and verapamil (which limits the use of the latter agents to patients
with normal left ventricular function) – so a simpler classification is "rate-limiting" and "non-
rate-limiting". Short-acting dihydropyridines have become unpopular following reports of
increased risk of MI at high doses. Longer-acting calcium-channel blockers are useful
antihypertensives, especially as they are lipid-neutral. Side effects include ankle edema,
headache, and flushing.
Renin/angiotensin system antagonists
Angiotensin is a potent vasoconstrictor, but also increases activity of the sympathetic nervous
system by both central and peripheral mechanisms. Fortunately, the renin–angiotensin system
provides a series of targets for pharmacological attack by ACEIs, angiotensin type 1 receptor
blockers (ARBs), and aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone). ACEIs and ARBs tend to be well
tolerated and have few contraindications, the most important of which is renal artery stenosis. It
is important to monitor renal function and potassium levels during initiation and maintenance of
these agents. ACEIs are contraindicated in women of child-bearing potential and may cause a
troublesome cough through their inhibition of the enzyme responsible for bradykinin
degradation. First-dose hypotension can be a problem in elderly patients on diuretics, although
newer, longer-acting formulations have reduced this concern. ACEIs are lipid-neutral, improve
insulin resistance, and may be able to induce regression of LVH.
Alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists
Alpha -antagonists (such as doxazosin and prazosin) are becoming more widely used in the
1
treatment of hypertension. They have a good side-effect profile (palpitations and occasional
postural hypotension). In addition, they are reported to have beneficial effects on lipid profile and
insulin resistance, and lack the negative effects on sexual potency of other antihypertensives,
which is a particular advantage for diabetics. They work to reduce total peripheral resistance by
blocking the sympathetic activation of α -receptors on resistance vessels.
1
Centrally acting sympathomimetics
Clonidine and α-methyldopa, centrally acting α -adrenoceptor agonists, were once popular
2
choices, but are now less widely initiated outside specialist scenarios such as pre-eclampsia.
They carry a risk of rebound hypertension on withdrawal.
Other vasodilators
Other vasodilators, such as hydralazine and the very potent minoxidil, are mostly used in
resistant hypertension when standard agents fail. Use of the latter is generally restricted by
unpleasant side effects such as hypertrichosis.
Imidazoline type 1 receptor agonists
The identification of imidazoline receptors has revealed that the effects of older agents on the
central nervous system reflect a relatively nonspecific central site of action mediated primarily
through α -adrenoceptor agonism (see Figure 2). It seems that some of the adverse effects of
2
these agents, which are also mediated through this pathway, can be avoided by the use of
selective imidazoline type 1 receptor agents. Early results suggest these agents are well tolerated,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 5/9
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
with a dry mouth being the only frequently reported unwanted effect (13% at 3 weeks, 2% at 12
months).
Figure 2
Centrally acting antihypertensives.
Pharmacotherapy selection
In the absence of compelling reasons to choose other medications, the first-line choice should
remain a β-blocker or thiazide diuretic. These are the drugs for which clear evidence of mortality
reduction exists. In addition, they are generally well tolerated. There are good reasons to consider
β-blockers first in younger people and thiazides first in older people. However, the majority of
patients will require more than one drug, and the choice should be rational. Here, synergistic
action is important (see Figure 2). Good combinations are:
thiazides (which cause secondary hyperreninemia) and ACEIs or ARBs (which block it)
β-blockers (which act to reduce renin release and cardiac output) and calcium-channel
blockers (which cause vasodilatation – do not combine β-blockers with verapamil or
diltiazem)
Following this, it is generally worth trying one of the other classes mentioned above. Treatment
will be highly individualized depending on patient tolerance and efficacy, but some guidelines
are outlined in Table 5. It is worth taking readings after each change of drug so that agents with
no effect can be stopped.
Table 5
Guidelines for hypertension pharmacotherapy.
Systolic versus diastolic hypertension
The question as to the relative importance of systolic and diastolic BP is common in the
management of hypertension. For many years it was felt that as systolic hypertension was more
common in the elderly it was an inevitable part of aging and arteriolar stiffening. As a result, the
focus was primarily on diastolic BP. In fact, both systolic and diastolic BP predict mortality
equally well. However, in the elderly population with predominantly systolic BP, recent evidence
suggests it is not the absolute values of systolic or diastolic hypertension, but the difference
between the two that predicts mortality best, ie, the pulse pressure. This means that a patient with
a BP of 160/80 mm Hg may be at higher risk than a patient with a BP of 160/90 mm Hg. This
finding, which actually fits well with current thinking on reflected pressure waves in the stiffer
arteries of older people, has little therapeutic relevance as yet because we do not have agents that
preferentially improve pulse pressure. Thiazides and calcium-channel blockers reduce systolic
hypertension more than diastolic, so these are the rational choices. However, the key for the
future may be drugs that can restore vascular elasticity, and in this respect nitrates – which
donate nitric oxide – are the most promising.
Special populations
Elderly patients
It is a myth that hypertension is "normal" in the elderly and they have less to lose because of a
shorter life expectancy. In fact, the absolute benefit from treatment of the elderly is much greater
than that for younger hypertensives because of their larger absolute risk. However, it is true that
the prevalence of hypertension is higher amongst the elderly. Optimum BP levels are the same
for older people as they are for younger people, and evidence for treatment benefit extends until
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 6/9
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
at least 80 years. Taking pulse pressure into account (see "Systolic versus diastolic hypertension",
above), the best agents are thiazide diuretics and long-acting dihydropyridine calcium-channel
blockers.
Ethnic groups
Afro-Caribbean blacks have a particularly high prevalence of hypertension and severe
complications. Their presentation is unusual in that the renin–angiotensin system is often
suppressed. As a result, β-blockers and ACEIs are unlikely to be successful as monotherapy in
these patients. Diuretics, calcium-channel blockers, and salt restriction are all effective.
Diabetics
Hypertension is common in diabetics and plays a major role in the vascular complications of the
disease. Recent studies have suggested there is more to gain from controlling hypertension in
diabetics than there is in achieving normoglycemia. For this reason, particularly aggressive BP-
lowering treatment is warranted in these patients. ACEIs, preferably combined with a thiazide
diuretic, are the treatment of choice. Previous avoidance of β-blockers or thiazide diuretics
because of possible worsening of glycemic control needs to be reassessed in light of this
information. Most recent studies show that both groups of drugs can be safely administered in
diabetics.
Pregnancy
Hypertension occurs in up to 10% of pregnancies. The key distinction is between chronic
hypertension in a pregnant woman and pregnancy-induced hypertension (pre-eclampsia) –
defined as a rise in BP of >30/15 mm Hg from early pregnancy. Little is known about which
agents are truly safe in pregnancy, but methyldopa is generally considered first line, with calcium
antagonists or hydralazine regarded secondarily. Labetalol is sometimes used in the third
trimester. In addition, trials in pregnant women with pre-eclampsia have suggested that
magnesium sulfate injections may reduce the risk of eclampsia developing by as much as half.
ACEIs should be avoided.
Erectile dysfunction
ED is a common problem in hypertensives. It is common because it can be caused by both
hypertension (via vascular disease) and its treatment. Differentiating the two from psychogenic
causes is a challenge. However, it is made easier by taking a full history: ask about desire,
morning erections, erections during masturbation, the exact timing of onset, life stress, sexual
history, alcohol, and nonprescription medication. Palpation of the penis for Peyronie's disease
and the testes for atrophy should be added to the routine examination. If ED clearly relates to one
particular medication, it is worth trying alternatives. If ED remains resistant, then possible
treatments are vacuum devices, intraurethral alprostadil, and sildenafil. Patients with more than
three risk factors for coronary disease should have an exercise test before starting sildenafil.
Generalist management
Hypertension is one of the few cardiovascular conditions where, in theory, the generalist can
manage the whole process. Because of the overwhelming likelihood that any given hypertensive
patient will have "essential" hypertension, only a small number of routine investigations are
warranted. These are:
urine dipstick
blood glucose, electrolyte, and creatinine levels
total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein ratio
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 7/9
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
electrocardiography
However, in a young patient, a patient with severe hypertension without a family history, or with
signs or symptoms suggesting a secondary cause, the full investigative program detailed above
(see "Investigations") should be instituted. This is normally done predominantly within a
specialist center.
Refer with confidence
In practice, hypertension specialists tend to see patients from one of the following four
categories:
patients with resistant hypertension
patients from special groups with hypertension, eg, pregnant women or young people
patients with known secondary hypertension
patients with possible accelerated hypertension (see below)
Most generalists would expect to try at least three agents and carry out basic investigations
before referring the patient to a specialist for the management of resistant hypertension.
Certainly, it would be unusual to make use of vasodilators in the community. However, in the
special groups mentioned above, it would not be uncommon for the full work-up to be done from
the beginning in a special center. Clearly, any suspicion of accelerated hypertension should result
in immediate referral.
Basic science
BP is a normally distributed, polygenic trait. That is, an individual's BP results from the
effects of many genes interacting with each other and the environment. Due in part to this,
genetics has so far struggled to explain essential hypertension. However, early studies have
suggested that up to 50% of variation within the general population could be explained by
genetic factors. The experimental approach has involved studying affected sibling pairs and
scanning the whole genome for chromosomal regions with higher levels of genetic marker
similarity.
Selectively bred animal models have also been used to study hypertension. Despite much
effort, the only mutations that have been convincingly shown to be associated with
hypertension are those of the ACE gene, and these gene polymorphisms are more strongly
associated with atherosclerotic disease than hypertension.
The role of the sympathetic nervous system in hypertension has been debated over many
years. Most agree that, together with inadequate salt excretion, it plays an important
initiating role (validating the choice of β-blockers as a first-line agent in young
hypertensives). However, there is significant controversy as to its continuing role. The
prevalent view is that the sympathetic nervous system plays only a minor part in chronic
hypertension, and recent studies showing the benefit of ARBs over β-blockers reinforce this.
Resistant hypertension
Failure to reduce BP to <140/90 mm Hg with three or more drugs qualifies the patient as
"resistant". Resistant hypertensives commonly suffer plasma volume expansion, despite the
absence of clinical signs. In this situation, a more aggressive diuretic therapy can achieve targets
where other combinations have failed to do so. Secondary causes are common in resistant
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 8/9
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 15:51 Hypertension - Cardiology Explained - NCBI Bookshelf
hypertensives – they should be referred to a specialist to ensure a full diagnostic work-up.
Apparent therapeutic failure could be due to noncompliance; many patients who have been
prescribed several different tablets for an asymptomatic condition respond by not taking all of the
tablets as directed. Therefore, before altering the medication, determine whether the patient is
actually taking it.
Malignant (or accelerated phase) hypertension
In about 1% of patients with hypertension, the condition follows an accelerated course. BP is
markedly raised (diastolic >130 mm Hg) and is associated with grade III–IV retinopathy. There
may be encephalopathy (headache, confusion, visual disturbance, seizures, and coma), cardiac
failure, and rapidly deteriorating renal function. The vascular lesion associated with malignant
hypertension is fibrinoid necrosis of the walls of small arteries and arterioles. The prognosis is
very poor: untreated, 90% of patients die within 1 year, and even with treatment the 5-year
survival rate is only 60%.
Malignant hypertension is a medical emergency that requires immediate therapy. However, the
fall in BP should be controlled and carefully monitored as cerebral and myocardial perfusion can
become compromised, which could lead to infarction (an initial target diastolic BP should be
around 100–110 mm Hg). The reduction in BP is achieved with parenteral agents, such as
nitroprusside or labetalol, ideally with intra-arterial BP monitoring. If a pheochromocytoma is
suspected, drugs such as phenoxybenzamine or phentolamine (α-adrenergic blockers) should be
used first. Once the acute episode has been successfully treated, the BP can be further titrated
down over the following weeks.
Further reading
1. Graves JW. Management of difficult-to-control hypertension. Mayo Clin Proc.
2000;75:278–84. [PubMed: 10725955]
2. Hurley ML. New hypertension guidelines. Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. RN. 1998;61:25–8.
[PubMed: 9544090]
3. Kjeldsen SE, Erdine S, Farsang C. et al. 1999 WHO/ISH hypertension guidelines –
highlights and ESH update. J Hypertens. 2002;20:153–5. [PubMed: 11791039]
4. O'Brien E, Staessen JA. Critical appraisal of the JNC VI, WHO/ISH and BHS guidelines
for essential hypertension. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2000;1:675–82. [PubMed:
11249509]
5. Ramsay L, Williams B, Johnston G. et al. Guidelines for management of hypertension:
report of the third working party of the British Hypertension Society. J Hum Hypertens.
1999;13:569–92. [PubMed: 10482967]
6. The American Heart Association guidelines are available at http://www .americanheart.org.
7. European guidelines are available at http://www .escardio.org.
Copyright © 2004, Remedica.
Bookshelf ID: NBK2217
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2217/ 9/9
