=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Module 1 - Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart (2).pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:16.579355",
  "file_size_bytes": 1290857,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/Module 1 - Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart (2).pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Cardiology
Self Learning
Package
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the
Heart.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 1
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 2 ---
CONTENT
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………Page 3
How to use the ECG Self Learning package………………………………………….Page 4
Overview of the Heart…………………………………………………...…………..…….Page 5
Location, Size and Shape of the Heart…………………………………………………Page 5
The Chambers of the Heart…………….………………………………………..……….Page 7
The Circulation System……………………………………….………………..…………Page 8
The Heart Valve Anatomy………………………….…………………………..…………Page 9
Coronary Arteries…………………………………………….……………………..……Page 10
Coronary Veins…………………………………………………………………..……….Page 11
Cardiac Muscle Tissue……………………………………………………………..……Page 12
The Conduction System………………………………………………………………...Page 13
Cardiac Cycle……………………………………………………………………………..Page 15
References…………………………………………………………………………………Page 18
Module Questions………………………………………………………………………..Page 19
Module Evaluation Form………………………………………………………………..Page 22
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 2
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 3 ---
INTRODUCTION
Welcome to Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart. This self leaning package is
designed to as tool to assist nurse in understanding the hearts structure and how the heart
works.
The goal of this module is to review:
Location , size and shape of the heart
The chambers of the heart
The circulation system of the heart
The heart’s valve anatomy
Coronary arteries and veins
Cardiac muscle tissue
The conduction system
The cardiac cycle
This module will form the foundation of your cardiac knowledge and enable you to
understand workings of the heart that will assist you in completing other modules.
Learning outcomes form this module are:
To state the position of the heart, the size and shape.
To identify the chambers of the heart
To identify the circulation system
To state the anatomy of heart valve
To identify the coronary arteries
To state the properties of cardiac muscle tissue
To indentify the conduction system
To identify the cardiac cycle
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 3
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 4 ---
HOW TO USE THE ECG SELF-LEARNING PACKAGE
Follow these steps to complete the self-learning module:
1) Complete the reading provided in this module
2) Complete the multi-choice question and evaluation, then return to the
Cardiology CNE/CNS
Following the completion of this module you will receive 6 hours professional development
time, which will be credited to your individual training database.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 4
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 5 ---
Overview of the Heart
The heart is a muscular organ that acts like
a pump to continuously send blood
throughout your body. The heart is at the
centre of the circulatory system. This
system consists of a network of blood
vessels, such as arteries, veins, and
capillaries. These blood vessels carry blood
to and from all areas of the body.
An electrical system regulates the heart and
uses electrical signals to contract the
heart's walls. When the walls contract, blood is pumped into the circulatory system. A system of
inlet and outlet valves in the heart chambers work to ensure that blood flows in the right
direction. The heart is vital to your health and nearly everything that goes on in the body. Without
the heart's pumping action, blood can't circulate within the body.
Blood carries the oxygen and nutrients that your organs need to work normally. Blood also carries
carbon dioxide, a waste product, to your lungs to be passed out of the body and into the air. A
healthy heart supplies the areas of the body with the right amount of blood at the rate needed to
work normally. If disease or injury weakens the heart, the body's organs won't receive enough
blood to work normally.
Location, Size and Shape of the Heart
The heart is located underneath the sternum
in a thoracic compartment called the
mediastinum, which occupies the space
between the lungs. It is approximately the
size of a man’s fist (250-350grams) and is
shaped like an inverted cone. The narrow
end of the heart is called the apex. It is
directed downward and to the left and lie
just above the arch of the diaphragm at the
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 5
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 6 ---
approximate level of the fifth or sixth
rib.The broad end of the heart is called the
base and gives rise to the major blood
vessels, which is directed upwards and to
the right and lies at the approximate level
of the second rib.
Surrounding the hearts is a fibrous sac
called the pericardium, which performs
several functions. Fluid within the sac
lubricates the outer wall of the heart so it
can beat without causing friction. It also holds the heart in place forms a barrier against infections
and helps keep the heart from over expanding.
The pericardium is made up of a coronal section which comprises of two walls and a thin
intervening space. The outer wall is thickest and consists of two tissue layers. The external layer is
formed by a dense irregular connective tissue and is often called the fibrous pericardium. This
layer protects the heart and anchors it to nearby organs.
At the roots of the major blood vessels, the parietal pericardium reflects back over the surface of
the heart to form the inner wall of the pericardium, the visceral pericardium. Because it is the
outer layer of the heart wall, the visceral pericardium is referred to as the epicardium. Together,
the parietal and visceral paricardial layers are also called the serous pericardium.
Between the walls of the serous
pericardium is the pericardial cavity. This
narrow space is normally filled with a few
(10-15) millilitres of pericardial fluid, which
is secreted by the serous membranes. The
fluid reduces friction between membranes
as they glide past one another during
heartbeats.
The heart wall is composed of three tissue
layers. Covering the outer surface of the
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 6
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 7 ---
heart is the epicardium. It is also referred to as the visceral pericardium, which is the inner layer of
the pericardium. The epicardium is a serous membrane that consists of an external layer of simple
squamous and an inner layer of areolar tissue (loose connective tissue). The squamous cells
secrete lubricating fluids into the pericardial cavity.
The thick middle layer of the heart wall is called the myocardium. It consists of numerous layers of
cardiac muscle fibres that wrap around the heart wall. Contraction of the myocardium pumps
blood out of the heart into the aorta and pulmonary trunk arteries. Covering the outer surface of
the heart wall is the endcardium. This layer also covers the heart valves and tendons and is
continuous with the endothelium that lines the major blood vessels that attach to the heart.
The endocardium is made up of thin layer of simple squamous cells and areolar tissue, similar to
the epicardium. Secretions from the squamous cells help regulate the activity of the myocardium.
The Chambers of the Hearts
The heart is made up of four chambers. The
superior chamber consists of the right
atrium and the left atrium, which lie
primarily on the posterior side of the heart.
Extending anteriorly from each thin walled
atrium is a small, ear-shaped appendage
called auricle that expands the volume of
the chamber.
Blood drains into the atria from the
pulmonary and systemic circulatory system. Composing the
lower chambers are the right ventricle and left ventricle,
which are much larger than the atria. The right ventricle
pumps blood through the pulmonary circulatory system and
the thicker walled left ventricle pumps blood through the
longer systemic circulatory system. Internally, the two
ventricles are separated by a thick myocardial wall called the
interventricular septum.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 7
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 8 ---
On the anterior surface of the heart, the interventricular septum is marked by a shallow diagonal
groove known as the anterior interventricular sulcus (or groove), which is occupied the anterior
interventricular artery, great cardiac vein and adipose tissue.
On the posterior surface of the heart, the
ventricles are separated by the posterior
interventricular sulcus, which contains the
posterior interior artery, middle cardiac vein
and adipose tissue.
The Circulation System
The major vessels of the heart are the large
arteries and veins that attach to the atria,
ventricles and transport blood to and from
the systemic circulatory system and
pulmonary circulation system. Blood is
delivered to the right atrium from the
systemic circulatory system by two veins. The
superior vena cava transport oxygen-depleted
blood from the upper extremities, heard and
neck. The inferior vena cava transport
oxygen-depleted blood from the thorax,
abdomen and lower extremities.
Blood exits the right ventricles through the
pulmonary trunk artery. Approximately two
inches superior to the base of the heart, this
vessel branches into the left and right
pulmonary arteries, which transport blood
into the lungs. The left pulmonary veins and
right pulmonary veins return oxygen-ated
blood from the lungs to the left atrium.
Blood passes from the left atrium into the left
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 8
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 9 ---
ventricle and then is pumped into the systemic circulatory system through a large elastic artery
called the aorta.
The Heart Valve Anatomy
Four valves maintain the unidirectional flow
of blood through the heart. The valves are
located between each atrium and ventricle
and in the two arteries that empty blood
from the ventricle. These valves are
primarily composed of fibrous connective
tissues that originate and extend from the
heart walls. The external surfaces of the
valves are covered by endocardium.
The Tricuspid valve (right atroventricular) is composed of three caps or flaps and controls blood
flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. The bicuspid valve is made up of two cusps or
flaps and controls blood flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle. The term mitral valve is also
commonly applied because the left AV valve is shaped somewhat like a bishop’s miter.
Thin tendon like cord called chordae
tendineae connect the AV valves to cone
shaped papillary muscles that extend
upward from the myocardium. The chordea
tendineae and papillary muscles tether the
AV valves to the ventricular walls. This
allows the valves to close properly and not
bulge (or prolapse) into the atria.
Semilunar valves direct blood flow from the
ventricles into the aorta and pulmonary
trunk artery. The valves are located in the vessels just above the opening to ventricles. Each
consists of three cusps that curve upwards to from small pockets.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 9
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 10 ---
The four heart valves open and close in
response to pressure changes that occur in
the ventricles during each cardiac cycle.
When the ventricles relax their pressures
drop below those of the atria, pulmonary
trunk artery and aorta. This allows the AV
valves to open as their cusps passively drop
downwards. The pressure change
additionally permits blood to flow into the
ventricles from the atria without restriction.
The semilunar valves close during this same
period as blood flowing toward the ventricles collects in the pockets of the cusps. Closure of the
semilunar valves prevents blood from re-entering the ventricles while they are relaxing. After
filling with blood, the ventricles contract and their rising pressures forces blood up towards the
atria and into the pulmonary trunk and aorta.
Blood pushing up under the cusps causes the atrioventricular valves to close. As a result, blood
enters the atria from the pulmonary veins but not from the ventricles. At the same time, rising
pressure in pulmonary trunk artery and aorta forces the semilunar valves to open and blood flow
into systemic and pulmonary circulatory systems. When the ventricles begin to relax, pressure in
the chambers drop again and a new cardiac cycle begins.
Coronary Arteries
The heart receives nutrients and gases from its own set of arteries, veins and capillaries called the
coronary circulatory system. Blood enters the coronary circulatory system through the left
coronary artery and the right coronary artery, which exit the aorta just above the cusps of the
semilunar valves.
After running a short distance between the pulmonary trunk artery and left auricle, the left
coronary artery emerges onto the anterior surface of the heart. Near this point, it branches into
the anterior interventricular artery (left anterior descending artery) and the left circumflex artery.
The anterior interventricular artery lies in the anterior interventricular sulcus and gives off
branches that supply blood to the anterior ventricles and anterior interventricular septum. The left
circumflex artery runs along the coronary sulcus (between the left atrium and ventricle) to the
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 10
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 11 ---
posterior side of the heart, where it usually ends in an anastomosis with the right coronary artery.
One or more left marginal arteries typically branch from the left circuflex artery as it travels
around the heart.
The left circumflex artery and its branches supply blood to the left atrium and the lateral and
posterior portions of the left ventricles. The right coronary artery travels along the coronary sulcus
(between the right atrium and ventricle) where it typically gives off smaller branches to the right
atrium. AV nodes (80% of people) and SA nodes (55% of people). Larger right marginal arteries
also diverge from the right coronary artery as it continues around the heart.
The right marginal arteries supply blood to the lateral wall of the right ventricle. On the posterior
surface of the heart, the right coronary artery typically (80%-85% of people) give rise to the
posrterior interventricular artery (PIV) or posterior descending artery (PDA), which runs along the
posterior interventricular sulcus and the posterior interventricular septum.
Coronary Veins
After flowing through the myocardium, most (80%) of the oxygen-depleted blood is returned to
the right atrium by several prominent veins that run along the surface of the heart. Draining blood
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 11
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 12 ---
from the anterior ventricle is the great cardiac vein. This vessel originates at the apex of the heart
and runs superiorly along the anterior interventricular sulcus (next to the anterior interventricular
artery). Near the right atrium, the great cardiac vein veers to the left and enters the coronary
sulcus (between the left atrium and ventricle), where it extends to the back side of the heart. One
or more left marginal veins typically merge with the great cardiac vein as it traverses the lateral
ventricular wall. Small anterior cardiac veins also drain blood from the anterior right ventricle
directly into the right atrium.
Blood is removed from the lateral and posterior right ventricle (and atrium) by the small cardiac
vein, which travels to the posterior surface of the heart in the coronary sulcus. Along its path, the
small cardiac vein receives blood from the one or more right marginal veins.
One the posterior side of the heart, the great and small cardiac veins merge with the coronary
sinus, which empties into the right atrium. The coronary sinuses also receives blood from the
middle cardiac vein that ascends along the posterior interventricular groove and the posterior vein
of the left ventricle.
Cardiac Muscle Tissue
Cardiac muscle cells make up the
myocardium portion of the heart wall. They
are relatively short, branched fibers that
measure approximately 10-20 micrometers
in diameter and 50 to 100 micrometers in
length. Typically each cardiac myocyte
contains a single nucleus, which is centrally
positioned.
Thick and thin myofilaments are present and
prganized into myofibrils. Their overlapping
arrangement creates alternating dark (A) and light (I) bands or striations, similar to those seen in
skeletal muscle tissue. Sarcoplasmic reticulum tubules surround the myofibrils. However, there are
not well organised and do not have termial cisternae. T-tubules are also present, but run along the
Z-discs (instead of the myofilament overlap zones). The mitichondria in cardiac myocytes are large
and numerous. They supply the ATP needed for repeated contraction of the heart.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 12
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 13 ---
Unlike other types of muscle tissues, cardiac myocytes are joined end to end by intercalated discs.
These complex, highly convoluted couplings contain both anchoring junctions and electrical
junctions. Forming the anchoring junctions are fascia adherens and desmosomes, which arrach the
adjacent myocyte. The electrical junctions are composed of connexon protein channels, which
usually occur in clusters referred to as gap junctions. Connexon proteins span the distance
between adjacent plasma membranes and ions can travel through the channel pores. Th ion
movement allows action potentials to pass directly from cell to cell. This property makes the entrie
myocardium act like a single cell.
The Conduction System
The conducting system of the heart consists
of cardiac muscle cells and conducting fibers
(not nervous tissue) that are specialized for
initiating impulses and conducting them
rapidly through the heart. They initiate the
normal cardiac cycle and coordinate the
contractions of cardiac chambers.
The conducting system provides the heart
its automatic rhythmic beat. For the heart to
pump efficiently and the systemic and
pulmonary circulations to operate in synchrony, the events in the cardiac cycle must be
coordinated.
The sinoatrial (SA) node is a spindle-shaped structure composed of a fibrous tissue matrix with
closely packed cells. It is 10-20 mm long, 2-3 mm wide, and thick, tending to narrow caudally
toward the inferior vena cava. The SA node is located less than 1 mm from the epicardial surface,
laterally in the right atrial sulcus terminalis at the junction of the anteromedial aspect of the
superior vena cava (SVC) and the right atrium (RA).
The middle internodal tract begins at the superior and posterior margins of the sinus node, travels
behind the SVC to the crest of the interatrial septum, and descends in the interatrial septum to the
superior margin of the AV node.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 13
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 14 ---
The posterior internodal tract starts at the posterior margin of the sinus node and travels
posteriorly around the SVC and along the crista terminalis to the eustachian ridge and then into
the interatrial septum above the coronary sinus, where it joins the posterior portion of the AV
node. These groups of internodal tissue are best referred to as internodal atrial myocardium, not
tracts, as they do not appear to be histologically discrete specialized tracts.
In 85-90% of human heart, the arterial supply to the AV node is a branch from the right coronary
artery which originates at the posterior intersection of the AV and interventricular groove. In the
remaining 10-15% of the heart, a branch of the left circumflex coronary artery provides the AV
nodal artery. Fibres in the lower part of the AV node may exhibit automatic impulse formation.
The main function of the AV node is modulation of the atrial impulse transmission to the ventricles
to coordinate atrial and ventricle contractions.
Bundle of His
The bundle of His is a structure that connects with the distal part if the compact AV node,
perforates the central fibrous body and continues through the annulus fibrous, where it is called
the non branching portion as it penetrates the membranous septum. Connective tissue of the
central fibrous body and membranous septum encloses the penetrating portion of the AV bundle,
which may send out extensions into the central fibrous body.
Proximal cells of the penetrating portion are heterogeneous and resemble those of the compact
AV node; distal cells are similar to cells in the proximal bundle branches. Branches from the
anterior and posterior descending coronary arteries supply the upper muscular interventricular
septum with blood, which makes the conduction system at this site more impervious to the
ischemic damage, unless the ischemia is extensive.
Bundle branches
The bundle branches originate at the superior margin of the muscle interventricular septum,
immediately below the membranous septum with the cells of the left bundle branch cascading
downward as a continuous sheet onto the septum beneath the noncoronary aortic cusp. The right
bundle branch continues intramycardially as an unbranched extension of the AV bundle down the
right side of the interventricular septum to the apex of the right ventricle and base of the anterior
papillary muscle. The anatomy of the left bundle branch system may be variable and may not
conform to a constant bifascicluar division.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 14
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 15 ---
Punkinje fibers
Punkinje fibers connect with the ends of the bundle branches to form interwearving network on
the endocardial surface of both ventricles. These fibers transmit the cardiac impulse almost
simultaneously to the entrie right and left ventricle endocardium. Punkinje fibers tend to be less
concentrated at the base of the ventricles and the papillary muscle tips and only penetrate the
inner third of the endocardium. They appear to be more resistant to ischemia than ordinary
myocardial fibers.
Cardiac Cycle
The cardiac cycle is the sequence of events that occur when the heart beats. The cycle has two
main phases: diastole – when the heart ventricles are relaxed and systole – when the ventricles
contract. In a cardiac cycle, blood enters the right atrium of the heart from the superior and
inferior vena cavae, and flows across the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. From the right
ventricle the blood flows into the pulmonary artery, which is separated from the ventricle by the
pulmonary valve.
After oxygenation in the lungs, blood returns to the heart via four pulmonary veins that enter the
left atrium. From the left atrium, blood flows across the mitral valve and into the left ventricle.
From the left ventricle blood is ejected across the aortic valve into the aorta. Together, the mitral
and tricuspid valves are known as the atrioventricular valves and the aortic and pulmonary valves
as the semilunar valves.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 15
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 16 ---
From a mechanical point of view, the cardiac cycle is due to blood movement as result of pressure
differences within the chambers of the heart. In order for blood to flow through a blood vessel or
through a heart valve, there must be force acting on the blood. This force is provided by the
difference in blood pressure (a pressure gradient) across these structures by the contractions of
the heart. Each heart beat, or cardiac cycle, is divided into two phases of contraction and
relaxation, stimulated by elctricla impulses from the sinoatrial node (SA node). The time during
which ventricular contraction occurs is called systole. The thime between ventricular contraction,
during which ventricular filling occurs is called diastole 9also known as the relaxation phase).
In early diastole, the ventricles relax, the semilunar valve close, the atrioventricular valves open
and the ventricles fill with blood. In mid diastole, the atria and ventricles are relaxed, the
semilunar valves are closed, the atrioventricular valves are open and the ventricles keep filling
with blood. In late diastole, the SA node sends and electrical impulse to the atria, this causes the
atria to contract and the ventricles to fill wit more blood. The electrical signal that causes
contraction moves from the atria toward the ventricles. Before it does, it reaches the
atrioventricular node (AV node). The AV node delays the signal so that the ventricles can contract
all at once rather than a little bit at a time.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 16
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 17 ---
Prior to systole, the electrical signal passes from the AV node down the AV bundl, also known as
the bundle of His to the Punkinje fibers. The fibers allow the fast spread of the electrical signal to
all parts of the ventricles and the electrical signal causes the ventricles to contract. Systole begins
with the closure if the atrioventricular valves. During systole, the ventricles contract, the semi-
lumar vwalves open and bloos is pumped from the ventricles to the aorta.
Blood pressure is highest during systole and lowest during diastole. It has two components, the
systole and diastole pressure. Normal systole pressure for an adult is estimates at 120 mmhg and
normal diastole pressure is estimated at 80 mmhg.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 17
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 18 ---
References
Cardiovascular Consultants 2006, Heart Anatomy, viewed December 2010,
www.cardioconsult.com/Anatomy
Cleveland Clinic 2009, Your Heart and Blood Vessel, viewed May 2011,
www.my.clevelandclinic.org/heart/disorders/cad/cad_arteries.aspx
Hatchett, R. & Thompson, D. (ed) 2007, Cardiac Nursing: A Comprehensive Guide, 2nd edn,
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier, London.
Woods, S, Froelicher, E, Motzer, S & Bridges, E 2005, Cardiac Nursing, 5th edn, Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 18
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 19 ---
Name: …………………………………………………………………… Date:…………………………
Ward/Unit:…………………………………………………………….
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart
Questions:
1. List and describe the four functions of the heart:
1.
2.
3.
4.
S
2. The adult heart is shaped like a
3. The adult heart is approximately the size of
4. The heart is located in the cavity between
5. The pericardium (Pericardial Sac) is described structurally as a
6. What is fibrous pericardium?
7. What is serous pericardium?
8. What fibrous pericardium prevents &
within the
9. The space between the two layers of serous pericardium is called
10. This space is filled with & its function is
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 19
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 20 ---
11. What is the epicardium?
12. What is the myocardium?
13. What is the endocardium?
14. The left atrium receives blood through four openings from the
15. The atria are connected to the ventricles through
16. What is the Interventricular septum?
17. Where is the tricuspid valve located?
18. Where other name is the bicuspid called?
Where is located?
19. Semilunar valves are located in the &
and are called &
20. Blood from systemic circulation enters the
21. The blood is then passed through the tricuspid valve to
22. Contraction of the right ventricles closes the
& opens the
23. Anterior interventricular artery are also called
24. It is located & supplies blood to
25. Right coronary artery and its branches lies within the
& extends from the
around to
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 20
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 21 ---
26. Most of the myocardium receives blood from
27. Where is the sinoatrial (SA) node located?
28. Where is the atrioventricular (AV) node located?
29. At the top of the interventricular septum the bundle divides to form:
a.
b.
30. The bundle branches form terminal branches called?
31. Why is the SA node called the pacemaker?
32. Cardiac cycle refers to
33. Define systole
34. Define diastole
35. When ventricular pressure is greater than the pressure in the pulmonary trunk and
aorta the are pushed open.
Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 21
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
--- Страница 22 ---
EVALUATION FORM
Topic: Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart.
We want to ensure that the training/education you have received is effective and relevant. We
would be grateful if you would complete this evaluation. Please circle the most appropriate rating.
(The response range from 1 for limited use, to 5 for very useful)
Circle your choice
1. Please rate the overall value of the Self Learning Package
1 2 3 4 5
Comments:
2. Please rate how relevant the information was to your position
1 2 3 4 5
Comments:
3. Please rate the presentation of the Self Learning Package
1 2 3 4 5
Comments:
Please add any further comments you consider would improve the programme.
[Module 1: Anatomy and Physiology of the Heart Page 22
Developed by Tony Curran (Clinical Nurse Educator) and Gill Sheppard (Clinical Nurse Specialist) Cardiology
(October 2011)
