=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "preview-9781907904899_A27353294.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:38:14.372589",
  "file_size_bytes": 1241337,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/preview-9781907904899_A27353294.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Cardiology
in a Heartbeat

Dedicated to our patients;
And to the students about to serve them
O T H E R T I T L E S F R O M S C I O N
For more details see www.scionpublishing.com

Cardiology
in a Heartbeat
Edited by:
Amar Vaswani University of Edinburgh
Hwan Juet Khaw University of Edinburgh
Dr Scott D Dougherty Cardiology Registrar, Ninewells
Hospital Dundee
Mr Vipin Zamvar Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon,
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Professor Chim C Lang Professor of Cardiology, University
of Dundee

© Scion Publishing Limited, 2016
First published 2016
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, without permission.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 1 907904 78 3
Scion Publishing Limited
The Old Hayloft, Vantage Business Park, Bloxham Road, Banbury OX16 9UX, UK
www.scionpublishing.com
Important Note from the Publisher
The information contained within this book was obtained by Scion Publishing Ltd from sources
believed by us to be reliable. However, while every effort has been made to ensure its accuracy, no
responsibility for loss or injury whatsoever occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action
as a result of information contained herein can be accepted by the authors or publishers.
Readers are reminded that medicine is a constantly evolving science and while the authors
and publishers have ensured that all dosages, applications and practices are based on current
indications, there may be specific practices which differ between communities. You should always
follow the guidelines laid down by the manufacturers of specific products and the relevant
authorities in the country in which you are practising.
Although every effort has been made to ensure that all owners of copyright material have been
acknowledged in this publication, we would be pleased to acknowledge in subsequent reprints or
editions any omissions brought to our attention.
Registered names, trademarks, etc. used in this book, even when not marked as such, are not to be
considered unprotected by law.
Typeset by Medlar Publishing Solutions Pvt Ltd, India
Printed in the UK

List of Contributors
Student contributors
Team leads:
Elton L.C. Luo Ala Noaman
Authors:
Luke Chan Daniel Mathie
Tina Cherian Ala Noaman
Stephanie Choo Noel Sharkey
Danielle Clyde Prabhsimran Singh
Hwan Juet Khaw Sher Ee Tan
Samantha Koh Amar Vaswani
Maria Koo Nethmi Vithanage
Kaiping Lin Elizabeth Wootton
Elton L.C. Luo Emily Yeung
Illustrations by:
Neng Gao Su Yi Khaw
Faculty contributors
Jack Andrews MBChB (Hons) MRCP Chim C Lang FRCP (Ed) FRCP (Lond) FACC
Cardiology Registrar Professor of Cardiology
Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy University of Dundee
Calvin Chin MD MRCP PhD Chris Lang MBChB MD MRCP (Ed)
Consultant Cardiologist Consultant Cardiologist
National Heart Centre, Singapore Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Scott D Dougherty MBChB BMSc (Hons) Nicholas L Mills MBChB PhD FRCP
MRCP Consultant Cardiologist
Cardiology Registrar Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Ninewells Hospital, Dundee
Paul Neary BSc MBChB (Hons) MRCP PhD
Marc Dweck MBChB BSc MRCP PhD FACC Consultant Cardiologist
Cardiology Registrar Borders General Hospital, Melrose
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Dzung Nguyen MBChB Dip Paeds FRACP
Ahmed El-Medany MBChB FRCPCH
Foundation Doctor Paediatric Consultant with Expertise in
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh Cardiology
Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh
Nikhil Joshi MBBS MRCP PhD
Cardiology Registrar
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
vii

LIST oF CoNTRIBUT oRS
Tania Pawade MBChB MRCP Anoop Shah MBChB (Hons) MRCP
Cardiology Registrar Cardiology Registrar
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Zahid Raza MBChB FRCS (Ed) FRCS (Gen) Neal Uren MD (Hons) FRCP
Consultant Vascular Surgeon Consultant Cardiologist
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Anne Scott MBChB FRCP MD Vipin Zamvar MS DNB (CTh) FRCS (CTh)
Consultant Cardiologist Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon
Borders General Hospital, Melrose Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
viii

Foreword
Cardiology in a Heartbeat is a remarkable and impressive achievement. It is remarkable by
any standard for the clarity of its presentation, superb illustration and succinct summaries
with key points highlighting the essentials of cardiology.
It is designed to fulfil the needs of medical students across a spectrum, with highlighted
‘pro-tip’ boxes for those who want to know more and tackle more in-depth examination
questions. The key information is also linked to the latest guideline recommendations –
an important feature as questions in the medical school curriculum tend to test knowledge
on these essential points.
Furthermore, Cardiology in a Heartbeat is designed and written for medical students
primarily by medical students – encompassing a major collaborative effort between twenty
medical student chapter contributors and eighteen senior clinicians and illustrators with
excellent structure and editorial oversight.
I believe that this publication will succeed in the electronic era because there is still a
need for a summary of the essentials of cardiology for modern medical students. This is
the era of information overload, and web searches do not necessarily help a student keep
perspective as to what is truly relevant.
One might think of this book as the equivalent of an amalgam of notes of the very best
students – it is certainly better than the handouts of some lecturers!
Keith A. A. Fox
Past President British Cardiovascular Society
Chair: European Society of Cardiology
Congress Programme Committee 2012–14
Professor of Cardiology (Emeritus), University of Edinburgh
August 2015
ix

Preface
Cardiology is an ever-changing field, with new evidence and randomised controlled
trials paving the way for updates in either investigations or management. This is a
scary proposition for most students, and we remember having similar issues during our
Cardiology block early on.
To help students with these problems, we initially provided numerous tutorials (delivering
the information in a more manageable format) to help navigate the maze of guidelines
fuelled by a rapidly growing evidence base. Our tutorials were very well received and
feedback from students indicated that there was a demand for more of this sort of
material, particularly in note or hand-out format. Last year, students were requesting
concise notes in far greater numbers.
The idea for a book was put across at a fairly innocuous dinner, and within a few days, the
society were excited to begin work on the project. During the process, we realised that the
essence of our book lay on three key pillars:
1. To our knowledge, there was huge demand for information presented in this format
We are very passionate about ensuring that students learn the material in an enjoyable
way. Personally, we love the field because it combines sound physiological principles
with practical hands-on intervention.
2. We want to encourage students to pursue a career in cardiovascular medicine
Cardiovascular disease is the number one killer in the developed world. More than seven
million people die from heart attacks each year. In addition to having a good grasp of
cardiology (because of the sheer number of patients affected), we want to encourage
the best and brightest to enter this field to develop novel therapies and conduct what
will hopefully be ground-breaking research. In some small way, we hope that our book
makes cardiology that little bit more attractive to study and motivates students to
consider the field.
3. Giving back
We think we speak for a good majority of our society when we say we joined medical
school to help people, and to give back. In addition to encouraging the next generation
of medical students, we also wanted to help raise funds for the British Heart Foundation
(BHF), an organisation dedicated to raising funds for research, education and awareness
of cardiovascular disease.
Whence you are called to sacrifice;
In your life and in your art,
Though trouble and toil may pile on high;
Serve with all your heart
To that end, we wish you the very best in your clinical rotations and we hope this text
serves as a useful tool that allows you to excel in cardiology, gain a greater appreciation for
the subject and serve your patients to the best of your ability.
A.V., H.J.K., E.L.C.L., A.N.
August 2015
x

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to extend their thanks to our team of students and physicians
for their hard work and dedication in bringing this project to life. We are also grateful to
Dr Scott Dougherty, Mr Vipin Zamvar and Professor Chim Lang for painstakingly looking
through the entire book for us. We would also like to extend our gratitude to Dr Nicholas
Mills, Dr Neal Uren and Professor Keith Fox for their advice and direction.
We would also like to thank Dr Jonathan Ray, Mr Simon Watkins and Ms Clare Boomer
at Scion Publishing for their continued support and belief in the project, as well as their
guidance during the publishing process.
We are also indebted to the students who have kindly provided us with valuable feedback
over the last year, and this has no doubt tremendously improved the finished article.
Special thanks go to all of the following: Trishan Bali, Clare Boyle, Fraser Brown, Marcus
Cabrera-Dandy, Stephanie Callaghan, Wei-Yee Chan, Ben Dallyn, Naomi Foster, Giles Goatly,
Katherine Hurndall, Anna Kane, Jane Lim, Prasanna Partha Sarathy, Henry Roscoe, Sushant
Saluja, Sandip Samanta, Alex Scott, Nick Smith, Rupert Smith, Charan Thandi, Hannah
Theobald, Daniah Thomas, Sayinthen Vivekanantham, David Walker, Rachel Wamboldt and
Philip Wright.
Last, but certainly not least, the authors wish to especially thank their families, friends,
and long-suffering better halves for their unconditional support and encouragement
throughout the writing process.
xi

List of Abbreviations
AAA Abdominal aortic aneurysm CBP Clinic blood pressure
ABC Airway, breathing, circulation CCB Calcium channel blocker
ABPI Ankle–brachial pressure index CHD Congenital heart disease
ABPM Ambulatory blood pressure CHF Congestive heart failure
monitoring CK Creatine kinase
ACE Angiotensin-converting CLI Critical limb ischaemia
enzyme CMRI Cardiac magnetic resonance
ACEi ACE inhibitor imaging
ACLS Advanced cardiac life support CMV Cytomegalovirus
ACS Acute coronary syndrome CNS Central nervous system
ADH Antidiuretic hormone CO Cardiac output
ADP Adenosine diphosphate COPD Chronic obstructive pulmonary
AF Atrial fibrillation disease
AKI Acute kidney injury COX Cyclo-oxygenase
ANCA Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic CPR Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
antibody CRP C-reactive protein
ANP Atrial natriuretic peptide CRT Cardiac resynchronisation
AP Action potential therapy
APO Acute pulmonary oedema CT Computerised tomography
AR Aortic regurgitation CV Cardioversion
ARB Angiotensin receptor blocker CVD Cardiovascular disease
ARDS Acute respiratory distress CXR Chest X-ray
syndrome DC Direct current
ARVC Arrhythmogenic right DCM Dilated cardiomyopathy
ventricular cardiomyopathy DHP Dihydropyridine
AS Aortic stenosis DVT Deep vein thrombosis
ASD Atrial septal defect EBV Epstein–Barr virus
ATP Adenosine triphosphate ECG Electrocardiogram
AV Atrioventricular EDV End diastolic volume
AVNRT Atrioventricular nodal re- EF Ejection fraction
entrant tachycardia EH Essential hypertension
AVR Aortic valve replacement ESM Ejection systolic murmur
AVRT Atrioventricular re-entrant ESR Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
tachycardia ESV End systolic volume
AVSD Atrioventricular septal defect EUCVS Edinburgh University
AXR Abdominal X-ray Cardiovascular Society
BNP Brain natriuretic peptide EVAR Endovascular aneurysm repair
BP Blood pressure FAST scan Focused Assessment with
bpm Beats per min Ultrasonography in Trauma
BT shunt Blalock–Taussig shunt FBC Full blood count
Ca2+ Calcium GAS Group A streptococcal
CABG Coronary artery bypass graft GCA Giant cell arteritis
CAD Coronary artery disease GI Gastrointestinal
xii

LIST oF ABBREVIATIoNS
GPI Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor sensitivity
GRACE Global Registry of Acute MI Myocardial infarction
Coronary Events MO Marginal obtuse
GTN Glyceryl trinitrate MPA Microscopic polyangiitis
GU Genito-urinary MPS Myocardial perfusion scanning
HBPM Home blood pressure monitoring MR Mitral regurgitation
HCM Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
HDL High density lipoprotein MS Mitral stenosis
HF Heart failure NDHP Non-dihydropyridine
HIT Heparin-induced NICE National Institute for Health
thrombocytopenia and Care Excellence
HIV Human immunodeficiency virus NO Nitric oxide
HLA Human leukocyte antigen NOAC Novel oral anticoagulants
HMG CoA 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl NSAIDs Non-steroidal anti-
coenzyme A inflammatory drugs
HOCM Hypertrophic obstructive NSTEMI Non-ST elevation myocardial
cardiomyopathy infarction
HR Heart rate PAD Peripheral arterial disease
HRT Hormone replacement therapy PAN Polyarteritis nodosa
HTN Hypertension PCI Percutaneous coronary
IC Intermittent claudication intervention
ICD Implantable cardioverter PCR Polymerase chain reaction
defibrillator PDA Patent ductus arteriosus
ICE Ideas, concerns and PE Pulmonary embolism
expectations PEA Pulseless electrical activity
IE Infective endocarditis PMBC Percutaneous mitral balloon
IHD Ischaemic heart disease commissurotomy
IM Intramuscular PND Paroxysmal nocturnal
INR International normalised ratio dyspnoea
IV Intravenous PPI Proton pump inhibitor
IVC Inferior vena cava PPM Permanent pacemaker
IVDU Intravenous drug user PVC Premature ventricular
JVP Jugular venous pressure contraction
LAD Left anterior descending artery PVD Peripheral vascular disease
LBBB Left bundle branch block PVR Pulmonary vascular resistance
LCX Left circumflex artery RAAS Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone
LDH Lactate dehydrogenase system
LDL Low density lipoprotein RAD Right anterior descending
LFT Liver function test artery
LHF Left heart failure RBBB Right bundle branch block
LMWH Low molecular weight heparin RCA Right coronary artery
LV Left ventricle RHF Right heart failure
LVAD Left ventricular assist device RVH Right ventricular hypertrophy
LVF Left ventricular failure SA Sinoatrial
LVH Left ventricular hypertrophy SBP Systolic blood pressure
LVOT Left ventricular outflow tract SC Subcutaneous
MAP Mean arterial pressure SL Sublingual
MC&S Microscopy, culture and SLE Systemic lupus erythematosus
xiii

LIST oF ABBREVIATIoNS
SNS Sympathetic nervous system TTE Transthoracic
SOB Shortness of breath echocardiography
SR Sarcoplasmic reticulum TVR Transcatheter valve
STEMI ST elevation myocardial infarction replacement
SV Stroke volume TWI T-wave inversion
SVC Superior vena cava U&Es Urea and electrolytes
SVR Systemic vascular resistance UA Unstable angina
SVT Supraventricular tachycardia UFH Unfractionated heparin
TAVI Transcatheter aortic valve URL Upper reference limit
implantation USS Ultrasound scan
TB Tuberculosis VF Ventricular fibrillation
TCA Tricyclic antidepressant VSD Ventricular septal defect
TFT Thyroid function test VT Ventricular tachycardia
TGA Transposition of the great VTE Venous thromboembolism
arteries VV Varicose veins
TIA Transient ischaemic attack WCC White cell count
TOE Transoesophageal WHO World Health Organization
echocardiography WPW Wolff–Parkinson–White
TSH Thyroid-stimulating hormone syndrome
xiv

How to Use This Book
This book aims to build upon relevant concepts from the pre-clinical years and bring you
up to speed on information that will be particularly useful to you in clinical cardiology. It
will incorporate basic anatomy, physiology and biochemistry, bridging the gap between
theoretical and applied science in the initial chapters, and introduce you to clinical
principles once the basics have been consolidated.
The book is divided into concept and clinical sections. If this is your first time approaching
cardiology as a subject, or if you need your knowledge refreshed, this book is best read
from cover to cover, as concepts discussed in the first half of the book will build on one
another as you progress through each chapter.
Some chapters are particularly synergistic, e.g. Chapter 4: Easy Peasy ECG and Chapter 11:
Arrhythmias. Alternatively, if you’re using this book as a revision tool, or if you’ve already
been through the material once already, you may simply decide to jump into whichever
chapter you’re ready to begin revising.
Clinical chapters are arranged in a concise manner, focusing on definitions, aetiology,
epidemiology, pathophysiological principles, key features and then an emphasis on
investigation and management, which have been arranged in a step-wise fashion to help
you decide what to do next.
We have also added in ‘Pro-tip’ boxes, which provide you with that little bit of extra
knowledge, ‘Exam Essential’ boxes, which give you an idea of what you must know, ‘Why?’
boxes, which explain the pathophysiology and rationale behind certain decisions and
processes, and last but not least, guidelines in red summarising the relevant information in
a bite-sized snippet.
We have also added ‘In a Heartbeat’ summaries at the beginning of each chapter to help
you consolidate your knowledge. We trust that you will accomplish much with what
little we have provided you, and that your patients’ needs will continue to remain at the
forefront of your minds.
“A physician’s understanding of physiology has much the same relation to his power of
healing as a cleric’s divinity has to his power to influence change in conduct.”
Samuel Butler
“The life so short; the craft so long to learn.”
Geoffrey Chaucer
cf. Hippocrates, Aphorisms
xv

Chapter 1
Anatomy and Physiology
of the Cardiovascular System
by Luke Chan, with Mr Vipin Zamvar
1.1 Introduction
The heart is a muscular organ that pumps blood throughout the circulatory system.
At a heart rate of 70 beats per minute, a human heart will contract approximately
100 800 times a day, more than 36 million times a year and nearly 3 billion times during
an 80-year lifespan.
Figure 1.1 – The anatomy of the heart.
1

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
1.2 Chambers of the heart
Cardiac chambers In A Heartbeat
Right • Receives venous blood from SVC, IVC, coronary sinus, anterior cardiac veins
atrium • Separation of smooth and rough areas by crista terminalis
• Fossa ovalis on interatrial septum
Right • Tricuspid valve: anterior, posterior and septal cusps
ventricle • Pulmonary valve: three semilunar cusps
• Lined by trabeculae carneae
• Moderator band conveying right bundle branch to ventricular muscle
Left • Receives oxygenated blood from four pulmonary veins
atrium • Smaller but thicker wall than right atrium
Left • 3× thicker wall than right ventricle (normal thickness 6–10 mm)
ventricle • Lined by trabeculae carneae
• Mitral valve: anterior and posterior cusps
• Aortic valve: anterior, right and left posterior cusps
The heart has four chambers: two atria and two ventricles that function to return
deoxygenated blood to the lungs and oxygenated blood to the rest of the circulation.
Figure 1.2 – The internal anatomy of the heart.
1.2.1 Right atrium
• Forms the entire right border
• Receives venous blood from the:
superior vena cava superiorly, draining the azygos, subclavian and jugular veins
inferior vena cava inferiorly, draining the lower body
coronary sinus inferiorly, draining the heart
anterior cardiac veins anteriorly, draining the anterior heart
2

1.2 // ChAMberS of the heArt
• Anterior part of wall is smooth
• Posterior part of wall is rough with trabeculations known as musculi pectinati (pectinate
muscles) derived from the true fetal atrium
• Crista terminalis is a muscular ridge that runs vertically downwards, separating the
smooth and rough parts
• Right auricle/atrial appendage is a cone-shaped muscular pouch-like extension of the
right atrium
• Fossa ovalis is a shallow oval depression in the interatrial septum
an embryonic remnant of the fetal foramen ovale.
1.2.2 Right ventricle
• Forms most of the inferior border and anterior surface of the heart
• Connected to the right atrium by the tricuspid valve which has three cusps: anterior,
posterior and septal
• Connected to the pulmonary trunk by the pulmonary valve comprising three semilunar
cusps
• Each cusp is connected to its corresponding papillary muscle by chordae tendinae
(heart strings)
• Trabeculae carneae are irregular ridges lining the wall
• Moderator band is a muscular bundle connecting the interventricular septum to the
anterior wall
conveys the right bundle branch to the ventricular muscle
• Infundibulum is the smooth-walled outflow tract directed upwards and right towards
the pulmonary trunk.
Figure 1.3 – Superior view of heart valves.
1.2.3 Left atrium
• Forms most of the base of the heart
• Smaller, but thicker walled than right atrium
3

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
• Receives oxygenated blood from the four pulmonary veins which open into the cavity on
its posterior wall (two from each lung: superior and inferior)
• Left auricle/atrial appendage is an ear-shaped muscular pouch extending forwards and
to the right
this is a common site for thrombus formation
• Mainly smooth-walled except for ridges in the auricle due to underlying pectinate
muscles.
1.2.4 Left ventricle
• Forms most of the left border and the apex of the heart
• Longer, more conical and thicker walled than the right atrium (three times thicker,
between 6 and 10 mm in a normal heart)
• Wall is lined by thick trabeculae carneae
• Joined to left atrium by mitral valve
• Mitral valve has two cusps: anterior and posterior
• Chordae tendinae connects each cusp to its corresponding papillary muscle
• Communicates with aorta via the aortic valve:
3 semilunar cusps: anterior, right and left posterior
anterior and left posterior aortic sinuses above the valve give rise to the right and left
coronary arteries respectively.
// PRO-TIP //
• ‘Pectinate’ means ‘like a comb’ in Latin
• The mitral valve gains its name from its resemblance to a bishop’s mitre
• A patent foramen ovale is found in 20% of adults and is usually asymptomatic
• Rupture of any papillary muscle, such as following a myocardial infarction, will cause the
valve cusp to prolapse, resulting in severe regurgitation.
1.3 Coronary circulation
Coronary circulation In A Heartbeat
Right • Originates from anterior aortic sinus, runs along atrioventricular (AV) groove
coronary • Major branches: sinoatrial nodal, posterior descending, AV nodal,
artery marginal
Left • Originates from left posterior aortic sinus
coronary • Major branches: left anterior descending, left circumflex
artery
Coronary • Great, middle, small and oblique cardiac veins drain into the coronary
veins sinus then into the right atrium
1.3.1 Coronary arteries
The heart has a high oxygen demand from continuous pumping of blood. This demand is
met by the left and right coronary arteries.
4

1.3 // CoronAry Cir CuLAtion
Figure 1.4 – The coronary vessels.
Right coronary artery
• Originates from the anterior aortic sinus
• Passes forwards between pulmonary trunk and right auricle
• Runs along the atrioventricular (AV) groove
• Continues to the inferior border of heart to anastamose with the circumflex branch of
the left coronary artery
• Major branches:
sinoatrial (SA) nodal artery runs posteriorly between the right auricle and aorta,
supplying the SA node
marginal artery along the inferior border of the heart
posterior descending/posterior interventricular artery descends in the posterior
interventricular groove to anastamose with the left anterior descending artery
at the apex
AV nodal artery arises from the characteristic loop where the posterior descending
artery originates to supply the AV node.
5

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
Left coronary artery
• Originates from the left posterior aortic sinus
• Larger than the right coronary artery
• Left main stem varies in length (4–20 mm)
known as the ‘widowmaker’ as occlusion leads to rapid death
• Initially passes behind then to the left of the pulmonary trunk
• Reaches the left part of the AV groove
• Runs laterally around the left border as the left circumflex artery to reach the posterior
interventricular groove
• Major branches:
left anterior descending (LAD)/anterior interventricular:
– descends in the anterior interventricular groove to anastamose with the posterior
descending artery at the apex
left circumflex (LCX):
– continues round the left side of the heart in the atrioventricular groove, giving off
various ventricular and atrial branches
– anastamoses with the terminal branches of the right coronary artery.
// PRO-TIP //
Knowledge of the major and minor branches of the coronary arteries is essential for
coronary angiogram interpretation. Figure 1.5 is a schematic of the arteries as visualised in
a typical coronary angiogram.
RCA = right coronary LAD = left anterior descending
RDP = posterior descending D1 = first diagonal branch of LAD
RPL = right posterolateral branch M1 = first marginal branch of LCX
LCX = left circumflex MO1 = first marginal obtuse branch of LCX
Figure 1.5 – Schematic of coronary arteries as visualised in a typical angiogram.
6

1.3 // CoronAry Cir CuLAtion
Anatomical variations
• 90% of the population are ‘right dominant’ – where the posterior descending/posterior
interventricular artery branches from the right coronary artery. In the ‘left dominant’
10%, the left coronary and circumflex arteries may be larger and branch off the posterior
descending artery before anastomosing with an unusually smaller right coronary artery.
• The SA node is supplied by the right coronary in 60% and the left circumflex artery in
nearly 40% of the population. Dual supply is present in 3%.
• The AV node is supplied by the right coronary artery in 90% of the population, with the
remaining 10% by the left circumflex.
// PRO-TIP //
• The coronary arteries originate from the aortic sinuses – small openings superior to the
cusps of the aortic valve. This makes coronary arteries the first branches of the aorta
• Coronary blood flow is about 250 ml/min at rest (5% of cardiac output) and rises to
1 L/min during exercise
• During systole (contraction), the aortic valves open and blood is ejected into the aorta.
When the aortic valves close during diastole (when the heart is at rest), blood in the
aorta flows into the aortic sinuses then into the coronary arteries to supply the heart
• Coronary flow takes place mainly during diastole. It is reduced during systole when the
intramyocardial arteries are compressed by the contracting muscle
• Therefore, diastolic perfusion time is important for the coronary circulation. This is
shortened by a rapid heart rate which may result in inadequate perfusion.
1.3.2 Coronary veins
Most of the heart’s venous drainage is fulfilled by the tributaries of the coronary sinus.
The coronary sinus runs in the posterior atrioventricular groove. It opens into the right
atrium just to the left of the opening of the inferior vena cava. Its orifice is guarded by the
Thebesian valve. Its tributaries are:
• the great cardiac vein in the anterior interventricular groove
• the middle cardiac vein in the inferior interventricular groove
• the small cardiac vein that accompanies the marginal artery along the inferior border
of the heart
• the oblique vein which descends obliquely on the posterior side of the left atrium.
The remaining venous drainage is fulfilled by:
• the anterior cardiac veins (3 or 4 of them) draining a large proportion of the anterior
surface of the heart directly into the right atrium
• small veins (venae cordis minimae) within each chamber wall draining directly into their
respective chambers.
7

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
1.4 Conducting system of the heart
Conducting system In A Heartbeat
SA node depolarisation → atrial contraction → AV node activation (0.1 s delay) → bundle
of His → left and right bundle branches → Purkinje fibres → ventricular contraction
Figure 1.6 – The conducting system of the heart.
The sinoatrial (SA) node (the ‘pacemaker of the heart’) is situated at the junction of the
superior vena cava and the right atrium. This is where the electrical cycle begins.
1. The SA node initiates contraction by depolarising both atria, causing them to contract
and pump blood into the ventricles.
2. The atrial action potential activates the AV node which lies in the interatrial septum
immediately above the opening of the coronary sinus.
3. The AV node introduces a delay of 0.1 seconds before relaying the impulse to the bundle
of His. This delay allows the ventricles to fill.
4. Depolarisation then spreads through the bundle of His (which then divides into the left
and right bundle branches) and Purkinje fibres to reach the ventricular muscle.
5. This activates the ventricles and causes them to contract.
In a normal heart, the total time taken for the action potential to travel from the SA
node to the end of the Purkinje fibres is about 0.22 seconds. A normal sinus rhythm is
approximately 72 beats per min, which equates to 0.83 seconds for each cardiac cycle.
8

1.6 // the CArdiAC Cy CLe
1.5 Nerve supply of the heart
• While the conductive system of the heart has its proprietary intrinsic pacemaker, the
autonomic nervous system is important in the rate of impulse formation, conduction
and contraction strength
• The heart’s nerve supply is derived from the vagus nerve (parasympathethic cardio-
inhibitor) and the C1-T5 sympathetic ganglia (cardio-accelerator) via the superficial
and deep cardiac plexuses
• Many drugs used in cardiology target the receptors shown in Table 1.1 (e.g. beta-blockers).
Table 1.1 – Actions of the autonomic nervous system on the heart
Sympathetic stimulation via β-adrenoceptors Parasympathetic stimulation via M receptors
1 2
↑ Heart rate ↓ Heart rate
↑ AV conduction ↓ AV conduction
↑ Contractility ↓ Contractility
↑ Excitability ↓ Excitability
// Why? //
Cardiac pain is not found exclusively in the chest but often radiates down the medial side of
the left arm and up to the neck and jaw. This is because radiation occurs to areas that send
sensory impulses to the same level of the spinal cord that receives cardiac sensation.
The sensory fibres from the heart travel up to T1-4, hence radiating to the medial left arm
via dermatomes T1-4. Cardiac vagal afferent fibres synapse in the medulla and descend to
the upper cervical spinothalamic tract cell, contributing to the pain felt in the neck and jaw.
1.6 The cardiac cycle
The cardiac cycle In A Heartbeat
Four phases:
Ventricular diastole (relaxation)
Isovolumetric Ventricular filling
ventricular relaxation
• Ventricles relax • AV valves open
• Aortic & pulmonary valves close – • Atria contract, filling ventricles
S “dub” • Maximally filled volume = end-diastolic volume
2
9

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
Ventricular systole (contraction)
Isovolumetric Ventricular ejection
ventricular contraction
• Ventricles contract • Aortic & pulmonary valves open
• AV valves close – S “lub” • Blood flows into aorta & pulmonary trunk
1
• Residual volume after ejection = end-systolic
volume
• Isovolumetric means that the ventricles contract or relax with no corresponding change
in ventricular volume. There are periods during these phases when all valves are closed.
Conversely, there is never a point in the cardiac cycle when all valves are open.
Figure 1.7 – The Wiggers diagram, named after Dr Carl Wiggers who in 1915 described the events occurring
during each cardiac cycle.
10

1.7 // heArt SoundS
Table 1.2 – The cardiac cycle
Ventricular diastole (relaxation)
Isovolumetric Ventricular filling
ventricular relaxation
• Initiated by repolarisation (T wave of ECG) • AV valves open as ventricular pressure drops below
• Ventricles relax, reducing ventricular pressure atrial pressure
• AV valves remain closed as ventricular pressure • Aortic and pulmonary valves remain closed
remains greater than atrial pressure • Most of the blood flows passively from atria to
• Ventricular pressure drops below aortic and ventricles
pulmonary pressure • Atria contract, actively pumping more blood into
• Aortic and pulmonary valves close → 2nd heart the ventricles
sound, S – “dub” • Maximally filled volume = end-diastolic volume
2
Ventricular systole (contraction)
Isovolumetric Ventricular ejection
ventricular contraction
• Initiated by ventricular depolarisation (QRS • AV valves remain closed preventing reflux of blood
wave of ECG) into atria
• Ventricles contract • As ventricular pressure exceeds pressures in arteries,
• Ventricular pressure exceeds atrial pressure the aortic and pulmonary valves open
• AV valves close → 1st heart sound, S – “lub” • Blood flows into aorta and pulmonary trunk
1
• Aortic & pulmonary valves remain closed • Residual volume after ejection = end-systolic volume
1.7 Heart sounds
Heart sounds In A Heartbeat
S “lub” S “dub”
1 2
• Closure of mitral & tricuspid valve • Closure of aortic & pulmonary valve
• Loud: thin, hyperdynamic • Split sound (aortic before pulmonary)
circulation • Loud: hypertension, hyperdynamic circulation
• Soft: obesity, mitral regurgitation, • Soft: aortic stenosis
mitral stenosis
S S
3 4
• Reflects rapid ventricular filling • Reflects ventricular wall stiffness
• Physiological in young and fit • Always pathological
patients
• In older patients: heart failure,
volume overload
11

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
1.7.1 S “lub”
1
• Reflects closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves
• Loud in: thin patients, hyperdynamic circulation (e.g. pregnancy), mitral stenosis
• Soft in: obesity, emphysema, pericardial effusion, mitral regurgitation or severe
mitral stenosis
• Best heard at the apex.
1.7.2 S “dub”
2
• Reflects closure of the aortic and pulmonary valves
• Physiological splitting of the sound may occur during inspiration
• Split into: Aortic before Pulmonary (A–P intervals)
2 2
• Because inspiration increases venous return → increases stroke volume → prolongs the
right ventricular ejection period
• Loud in: systemic hypertension, hyperdynamic circulation
• Soft in aortic stenosis.
1.7.3 S “KENTUCKY: KEN = S , TUCK = S , Y = S ”
3 1 2 3
• Reflects rapid ventricular filling, when blood strikes a compliant left ventricle
• Occurs in early diastole, just after S when the mitral valve opens
2
• May be physiological in young, fit patients or children
• In older patients, may be due to heart failure or volume overload
• Best heard at the apex.
1.7.4 S “TENNESSEE: TEN = S , NES = S , SEE = S ”
4 4 1 2
• Reflects surge of ventricular filling with atrial systole
• Occurs in late diastole, immediately before S, when the atria contract to force blood into
1
a non-compliant left ventricle
• Always pathological
• Never present in atrial fibrillation (there is no atrial contraction)
• Indicates increased ventricular stiffness or hypertrophy
• E.g. hypertension, aortic stenosis, acute myocardial infarction (MI)
• Like S, best heard at the apex.
3
1.8 Cardiac muscle contraction
Cardiac muscle contraction In A Heartbeat
Contraction: Calcium-induced calcium release
Depolarisation → Little Ca2+ enters cytosol → Ca2+ enters sarcoplasmic reticulum →
SR releases more Ca2+ into cytosol → Ca2+ binds to troponin → cross-bridge formation
between actin-myosin → contraction
Relaxation:
Ca2+ is pumped from cytosol back into SR → Ca2+ levels drop → Ca2+ dissociate from
troponin → relaxation
12

1.8 // CArdiAC MuSCL e ContrACtion
Cardiac muscle cells are known as cardiac myocytes. Following depolarisation, calcium
(Ca2+) enters the cell through L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the sarcolemma.
This supplies only 20% of the Ca2+ required, insufficient for muscle contraction. The rest is
released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) where Ca2+ is stored in high concentration
in a calcium-induced calcium release process (see Figure 1.8) unique to cardiac muscle.
The sequence of events is as follows:
Initiation of contraction
• Depolarisation causes Ca2+ to enter the myocyte via L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels
• This causes a rise in Ca2+ concentration in the gap between sarcolemma and SR
• This activates Ca2+-sensitive Ca2+ release channels (ryanodine receptors) in the SR
• Ca2+ floods into the cytoplasm down its concentration gradient. This releases a large
amount of Ca2+, sufficient to initiate contraction.
Contraction
• Calcium ions in the sarcoplasm then interact with troponin C to initiate cross-bridge
formation
• When Ca2+ binds to troponin C, the actin binding site is exposed, allowing the myosin
head to bind to the actin filament
• Just as in skeletal muscle contraction, using adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis,
the myosin head pulls the actin filament towards the centre of the sarcomere.
Relaxation
• When the concentration of Ca2+ exceeds resting levels, ATP-dependent Ca2+ pumps
(Ca2+-ATPase) in the tubular part of the SR are activated and pump Ca2+ from the
cytosol back into the SR
• As the action potential (AP) repolarises and Ca2+ channels inactivate, this mechanism
reduces Ca2+ towards resting levels, Ca2+ disassociates from troponin C and the
muscle relaxes.
Figure 1.8 – Calcium-induced calcium release process in a cardiac myocyte leading to contraction of
cardiac muscle.
13

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
1.9 Cardiac output
Cardiac output In A Heartbeat
Cardiac output (CO) • SV × HR
• Mean arterial pressure (MAP)/systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
Stroke volume (SV) • Volume pumped by each ventricle per beat
• End diastolic volume (EDV) – end systolic volume (ESV)
Heart rate (HR) • 60–100 bpm normal, <60 bpm bradycardia, >100 bpm tachycardia
• Sympathetic ↑ HR, parasympathetic ↓ HR
Preload • Degree of wall stress at end-diastole
• Frank–Starling mechanism: ↑ preload → ↑ cardiac output
Afterload • Degree of wall stress during systole
• Forces that oppose ejection of blood out of ventricles
• ↑ afterload → ↓ cardiac output
Contractility • Force of myocardial contraction
1.9.1 Definitions
• The cardiac output is the volume of blood ejected by each ventricle per minute
Cardiac output (CO) = Stroke volume (SV) × heart rate (HR)
= Mean arterial pressure ÷ systemic vascular resistance
• At rest, the average cardiac output is about 5 L/min
• During exercise, this can exceed 25 L/min as the heart rate increases two to three times
and stroke volume doubles.
• The stroke volume (SV) is the volume of blood pumped by each ventricle per beat
• It is about 75 ml in a normal heart and may double during exercise
Stroke volume (SV) = End diastolic volume (EDV) – end systolic volume (ESV)
• End diastolic volume (EDV) = maximum ventricular volume immediately before systole
(~120 ml)
• End systolic volume (ESV) = minimum ventricular volume (~40 ml) immediately before
diastole.
• The ejection fraction (EF) is the percentage (%) of blood ejected by the ventricle relative
to its filled volume
1.9.2 Regulation of cardiac output
Adequate cardiac output is important for ensuring that each organ receives its minimum
required blood flow. The body regulates cardiac output by regulating heart rate and stroke
volume.
14

1.9 // CArdiAC outPut
Heart rate
• A normal heart rate is between 60 and 100 bpm
<60 bpm is bradycardia
>100 bpm is tachycardia
• This is affected by the heart’s intrinsic rhythmicity and extrinsic stimulation by the
autonomic nervous system
Sympathetic stimulation increases heart rate
Parasympathetic stimulation decreases heart rate.
Stroke volume
The stroke volume is affected by preload,
afterload and contractility.
Preload
• The preload is the degree of heart muscle
stretching (wall stress) at end-diastole
(when the ventricle is completely relaxed)
• The Frank–Starling law (Figure 1.9)
dictates that the contraction of a cardiac
muscle fibre is proportional to the initial
length of the muscle fibre
• Thus, the greater the stretch on the
ventricle during diastole, the greater its
force of contraction during systole Figure 1.9 – The Frank–Starling law of the heart.
• This allows the heart to alter its force of
contraction in response to changes in venous return (see Figure 1.10)
• Impairment of this mechanism is involved in the development of heart failure (for further
discussion, see Chapter 10).
Figure 1.10 – An increase in venous return leads to a rise in cardiac output.
Afterload
• Afterload is the degree of heart muscle stretching (wall stress) during systole
• It is inversely related to stroke volume
• It is affected by the forces that oppose ejection of blood out of the ventricles
• Factors increasing afterload include:
raised aortic pressure
aortic stenosis
increased systemic vascular resistance such as during hypovolaemic shock
ventricular dilatation
• Factors decreasing afterload include:
vasodilator drugs e.g. nitrates, calcium channel blockers (non-rate limiting)
vasodilator metabolites in septic shock.
15

ChAPter 1 // AnAtoMy And PhySioLogy of the CArdioVASCuLAr SySteM
Contractility
• The contractility of the heart is the force of myocardial contraction
• The ejection fraction on echocardiography can be used as a measure of contractility
• Factors increasing contractility include:
increased preload (Frank–Starling mechanism)
sympathetic stimulation
raised extracellular calcium
drugs e.g. inotropes, digoxin
hormones e.g. catecholamines, thyroxine, growth hormone, glucagon
• Factors decreasing contractility include:
reduced preload (Frank-Starling mechanism)
parasympathetic stimulation
decreased extracellular calcium
cardiac ischaemia
hypoxia
hypercapnia
acidosis
drugs e.g. beta-blockers, anaesthetics, antiarrhythmics.
1.10 Blood pressure
Blood pressure In A Heartbeat
• Blood pressure sensed by baroreceptors (carotid sinus, aortic arch)
• Low BP → baroreceptor reflex → ↑ vasoconstriction, ↑ HR, ↑ contractility
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system:
• renin → angiotensin I → angiotensin II → vasoconstriction + water retention → ↑ BP
1.10.1 Definitions
• Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by circulating blood against the vessel walls
• It can be calculated using the formula:
Blood pressure (BP) = Cardiac output (CO) × systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
• The systolic pressure is the maximum pressure recorded during systole
• The diastolic pressure is the minimum pressure recorded during diastole
• The pulse pressure is the systolic pressure minus the diastolic pressure
can be examined when feeling a patient’s pulse
at a normal blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, the pulse pressure is 40 mmHg
a narrow or wide pulse pressure is pathological (refer to Chapter 2).
1.10.2 Regulation of blood pressure
Blood pressure regulation is an important part of homeostasis to ensure adequate
perfusion to all parts of the body and preserving organ function. Blood pressure is
regulated by regulating cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance.
16
