Understanding the echocardiogram - Cardiology Explained
Chapter 4 Understanding the echocardiogram
Although few generalists actually perform echocardiograms, most order or have to interpret them
at some stage. Our aim then is not to explain how to carry out echocardiography, but how to
realize its potential and limitations.
Background
"Ultra" sound has a frequency above the range audible by humans (ie, >20,000 Hz). For adult
cardiac imaging, ultrasound waves in the range of 4–7 MHz are used (intravascular ultrasound
uses frequencies as high as 30 MHz). These are created within the ultrasound probe by striking
piezo-electric crystals with an electric pulse, which stimulates the crystals to release sound
waves. The central principle of ultrasound imaging is that, while most waves are absorbed by the
body, those at interfaces between different tissue densities are reflected. In addition to emitting
the ultrasound waves, the transducer detects the returning waves, processes the information, and
displays it as characteristic images. Higher frequency ultrasound waves increase resolution, but
decrease tissue penetration.
Imaging modes
There are three basic "modes" used to image the heart:
two-dimensional (2D) imaging
M-mode imaging
Doppler imaging
Two-dimensional imaging
2D imaging is the mainstay of echo imaging and allows structures to be viewed moving in real
time in a cross-section of the heart (two dimensions). It is used for detecting abnormal anatomy
or abnormal movement of structures. The most common cross-sectional views are the parasternal
long axis, the parasternal short axis, and the apical view (see Figure 1). The gastric or subcostal
and suprasternal views are also commonly used.
Figure 1
The most common two-dimensional imaging echo views. The
first line illustrates the three planes (think of them as three
plates of glass intersecting at 90°), the second line shows
these three planes separated, and the third line shows the
accompanying (more...)
M-mode imaging
The M-mode echo, which provides a 1D view, is used for fine measurements. Temporal and
spatial resolutions are higher because the focus is on only one of the lines from the 2D trace (see
Figure 2).
Figure 2
M-mode image of (a) the aorta/left atrium and (b) the mitral
valve, both in a healthy heart.
Doppler imaging
The concept of Doppler imaging is familiar to all those who have heard the note of a police siren
change as it moves past them – as the police siren travels towards you, the frequency of the wave
(pitch) appears to be higher than if it was stationary; as the siren travels away, the pitch appears
to be lower.
Estimates of blood-flow velocity can be made by comparing the frequency change between the
transmitted and reflected sound waves. In cardiac ultrasound, Doppler is used in three ways:
continuous-wave (CW) Doppler
pulsed-wave (PW) Doppler
color-flow mapping (CFM)
Continuous-wave Doppler
CW Doppler is sensitive, but, because it measures velocity along the entire length of the
ultrasound beam and not at a specific depth, it does not localize velocity measurements of blood
flow. It is used to estimate the severity of valve stenosis or regurgitation by assessing the shape
or density of the output (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
Continuous-wave Doppler signal.
Pulsed-wave Doppler
PW Doppler was developed because of the need to make localized velocity measurements of
turbulent flow (it measures the blood-flow velocity within a small area at a specified tissue
depth). It is used to assess ventricular in-flow patterns, intracardiac shunts, and to make precise
measurements of blood flow at valve orifices.
Color-flow mapping
CFM uses measurements of the velocity and direction of blood flow to superimpose a color
pattern onto a section of a 2D image (see Figure 4). Traditionally, flow towards the transducer is
red, flow away from the transducer is blue, and higher velocities are shown in lighter shades. To
aid observation of turbulent flow there is a threshold velocity, above which the color changes (in
some systems to green). This leads to a "mosaic" pattern at the site of turbulent flow and enables
sensitive screening for regurgitant flow.
Figure 4
Color-flow mapping.
Transesophageal echocardiography
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is usually carried out under mild sedation with
midazolam. A thin probe is passed down the esophagus until it is level with the heart. This
position provides especially clear views. It is particularly useful for imaging posterior cardiac
structures. The key indications for TEE are:
infective endocarditis – if vegetations are not seen on transthoracic echo, but suspicion is
high, or with prosthetic valves
to rule out an embolic source (especially in atrial fibrillation)
 2/5
 
acute dissection
mitral valve (MV) disease preoperatively
Contrast echocardiography
Contrast echo can be useful for confirming a diagnosis of atrial septal defect (ASD). Agitating
saline or synthetic contrast create microbubbles. These are very reflective, and when injected
intravenously can be seen as opacification in the echo window. They are normally seen on the
right side of the heart before being trapped and absorbed by the pulmonary capillaries, so have
no route to the left side of the heart. The contrast created by the bubbles allows a left-to-right
shunt to be seen as a jet "interrupting" the opacification of the right atrium. However, there is a
theoretical risk of systemic air embolism with a right-to-left shunt.
Applications
Echo is the cheapest and least invasive method available for screening cardiac anatomy.
Generalists most commonly request an echo to assess left ventricular (LV) dysfunction, to rule
out the heart as a thromboembolic source, and to characterize murmurs. The approximate normal
values for various cardiac structures are described in Table 1.
Table 1
The approximate normal values for various cardiac structures.
IV: interventricular; LV: left ventricular.
Systolic dysfunction
LV systolic dysfunction is assessed using the ejection fraction (the percentage of the end diastolic
volume ejected during systole). In most cases, this is estimated by eye from all the available echo
views. A normal ejection fraction is 50%–80%, but values as low as 5% are compatible with life
(end-stage heart failure).
The E/A ratio
When flow across the MV is assessed with PW Doppler, two waves are characteristically seen.
These represent passive filling of the ventricle (early [E] wave) and active filling with atrial
systole (atrial [A] wave). Classically, the E-wave velocity is slightly greater than that of the A
wave (see Figure 5). However, in conditions that limit the compliance of the LV, two
abnormalities are possible:
Figure 5
E and A waves representing mitral flow in a healthy heart
(E>A).
reversal – in which the A wave is greater than the E wave. This indicates slow filling
caused by older age, hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), or diastolic
dysfunction
exaggeration of normal – a tall, thin E wave with a small or absent A wave. This indicates
restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis, or infiltrative cardiac disease (eg,
amyloidosis)
Diastolic dysfunction
A normal LV ejection fraction in the presence of the heart failure syndrome leads to a search for
diastolic dysfunction. Typical echo findings in diastolic dysfunction are normal LV cavity size,
 3/5
 
thickened ventricle, and reversed E/A ratio.
Wall-motion abnormality
When ischemia occurs, contractile abnormalities of segments of the myocardium can be detected
by echo prior to the appearance of electrocardiogram (ECG) changes or symptoms. Therefore,
echo can be a valuable tool in the diagnosis of both stable coronary artery disease (via stress
echo) and acute myocardial infarction. In the former situation, it offers localization of the
ischemic region where the ECG cannot; in the latter, it offers some measure of the extent of the
infarct and a screen for complications, such as ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Valve assessment
Echo is the tool of choice for the assessment of valvular abnormalities.
Aortic stenosis
The etiology of aortic stenosis (AS) can be confirmed by the visualization of either a bicuspid
valve or calcification. The severity of the stenosis can be estimated by measuring high-velocity
flow across the valve by Doppler. This can be converted to an estimation of the pressure drop. In
addition, the effective orifice area can be measured (see Table 2).
Table 2
Echo characteristics of aortic stenosis.
Aortic regurgitation
CFM is the most useful technique for detecting and quantifying the degree of regurgitation. The
width of the regurgitant jet and of the slope of the decline in pressure gradient between the left
ventricle and the aorta (which is reduced already compared with normal) are measured.
Mitral stenosis
With mitral stenosis (MS), as with AS, calcified, immobile MV leaflets can be demonstrated with
2D and M-mode echo. Anterior motion of the posterior MV leaflet in diastole (caused by
commissural fusion) is characteristic in MS. Doppler demonstrates increased flow velocity and
can be used to estimate the effective orifice area (see Table 3).
Table 3
Echo characteristics of mitral stenosis.
Mitral regurgitation
As with aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation is assessed using CFM. The severity of mitral
regurgitation is commonly reported as the area of the regurgitant jet expressed as a percentage of
the area of the left atrium.
Mitral valve prolapse
The criteria for the diagnosis of MV prolapse (MVP) from an echo have changed over the years.
Initial reports using the 4-chamber view suggested a population prevalence of almost 20%.
However, a more accurate figure of approximately 5% results from stricter criteria. Most
diagnose only on the basis of the parasternal long axis view. Some go so far as to suggest it is
invalid to diagnose MVP on the 4-chamber view at all.
Paraprosthetic regurgitation
 4/5
 
Although metal valves stop ultrasound completely, echo is a useful tool for studying prosthetic
valve function. The TEE approach is often used.
Infective endocarditis
Echo is the key investigation in infective endocarditis and, although a low threshold for TEE is
warranted by its higher detection rate, transthoracic echo can demonstrate vegetations in
approximately 70% of cases (see Chapter 10, Infective endocarditis).
Embolic sources
The primary cardiac sources for embolism are:
an akinetic ventricular segment
an LV aneurysm
the atrial appendage
These are best visualized with TEE.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Although hypertrophy is variable, echo remains the screening tool of choice in suspected cases.
The classic features are asymmetrical hypertrophy of the interventricular septum and anterior
movement of the MV in systole. LV function is normal, and there may be dynamic LV outflow
tract obstruction.
