Valve disease - Cardiology Explained
Chapter 9 Valve disease
Disease of the heart valves remains an important cause of morbidity and mortality across the
world. While advances in echocardiography and the widespread availability of antibiotics have
changed the prevalence, management, and especially the diagnosis of valve disease for
specialists, very little has changed for generalists, who hear heart murmurs less frequently. Even
though echo diagnosis is not readily available to generalists, they nevertheless feel pressured to
identify murmurs and to report them, with their associated signs, in the referral letter. Similarly,
for many examiners, the appeal of obscure murmurs for clinical short-case exams remains too
great to resist, despite its mostly historical relevance. Yet, there are few greater pleasures in
clinical medicine than having your stethoscopic diagnostic brilliance confirmed by an echo
report. Furthermore, healthcare economics has prompted a renewed interest in the power of the
stethoscope for diagnosing and even quantifying valve disease.
The asymptomatic murmur
Opinions differ as to the management of a murmur that has been picked up incidentally. By far
the most common is the mid systolic 2/6 murmur (grade II – see Table 1). For children and
young adults with an asymptomatic mid systolic murmur, a negative history and a negative
physical exam are sufficient to exclude sinister pathology in most cases.
Table 1
Grading of murmurs.
In the elderly, it is important to differentiate between the common and benign aortic sclerosis and
the less common and less benign aortic stenosis (AS). As such, close attention should be paid to
the cardiac exam. In particular, AS is indicated by:
murmur radiation
the presence of a thrill
a soft second heart sound
In addition, an electrocardiogram should be carried out to screen for left ventricular hypertrophy
(LVH), ischemia, and atrial size or conduction abnormalities. If none of the above is present and
the patient remains asymptomatic, the most likely diagnosis is aortic sclerosis and no echo is
required.
Referral is warranted when a murmur in an asymptomatic patient is:
systolic and grade III or above
late systolic
mid systolic and accompanied by clinical signs suggestive of AS
diastolic
continuous
Aortic stenosis
 1/13
 
Causes
Congenital aortic stenosis
Congenital AS is usually due to a bicuspid valve. A bicuspid valve in itself does not give rise to
significant hemodynamic abnormality, but it has a tendency to calcify and a predisposition to
infective endocarditis (see Table 2).
Table 2
Clinical signs in aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation.
Rheumatic aortic stenosis
Rheumatic AS results from cusp fusion and calcification many years following rheumatic fever.
Senile aortic stenosis
Senile, or degenerative, AS results from calcium deposition on the aortic surface of the valve.
This is becoming an increasingly important disability problem in the elderly.
Physical signs
The carotid pulse is slow rising with reduced amplitude.
The venous pressure is usually normal until late in the disease.
The apex beat is sustained and can be doubled due to an additional atrial component.
On auscultation, the second heart sound is single when the valve is calcified due to a lack
of aortic component. The classic ejection systolic murmur, which can radiate to one or
both carotids, is usually heard best over the aortic area. A soft, early diastolic murmur of
aortic regurgitation (AR) often coexists.
Investigation and management
Echo is the diagnostic tool of choice for valve disease – in particular, Doppler measurement of
valve gradients can quantify lesions. Significant hemodynamic changes do not occur until the
aortic valve area has been reduced to a quarter of its normal size (the normal orifice is 3–4 cm2).
AS is classed as:
mild if the area is >1.5 cm2
2
moderate if the area is 1–1.5 cm
2
severe if the area is <1 cm
The Invention of the Stethoscope
"In the summer of 1816, Laennec was called to a young lady who presented the general
symptoms of disease of the heart; the application of the hand to the chest and percussion
afforded very little assistance, and immediate auscultation was interdicted by the sex and
a
embonpoint of the patient. The recollection of the well-known fact, that the tap of a pin at
one end of a beam could be heard distinctly at the opposite end, induced him at the moment,
to avail himself of this acoustic phenomenon. He took a quire of paper, rolled it tightly
together, applied one extremity over the region of the heart, and putting the ear to the other,
was surprised to find that he could distinguish the pulsation of the heart in a more distinct
 2/13
 
manner than he could before do with the naked ear. Having hit upon the principle he
extended its application to the investigation of the various sounds produced in the chest by
the respiration, the voice, and the accidental presence of fluids in the lung, pleural sac, and
pericardium."
Mediate Auscultation, 1816. (Quoted in The Lancet 1998;352:997.)
a
Corpulence, physically bulky.
Severe stenosis causes a transvalvular pressure gradient of >50 mm Hg in the presence of normal
transvalvular flow (ie, normal LV function). However, abnormally low pressure gradients are
found in conditions of LV dysfunction, so the gradient alone is not a clear guide.
The natural history of AS is one of slow progression. Studies suggest that some patients exhibit a
decrease in valve area of 0.1–0.3 cm2/year, although no progression is discernible in many
patients. However, regardless of the individual variability, symptoms of angina, syncope, or heart
failure generally develop after a latent period. At this point, the outlook changes dramatically.
After the onset of symptoms, the average survival is less than 3 years. Thus, development of
symptoms is the critical point in the natural history of AS and thereafter the benefits of surgery
outweigh the risk. Consequently, asymptomatic AS patients should be monitored closely.
Although there is no clear consensus, most cardiologists follow-up mild AS annually (together
with 5-yearly echos); moderate AS every 6 months (together with 2-yearly echos); and severe AS
more frequently (together with annual echos). If a patient with AS presents with a change in
symptoms, their next appointment at the cardiology clinic should be expedited.
If a patient with severe AS is undergoing open chest bypass grafting for coexisting coronary
artery disease (CAD), the opportunity should be taken to carry out aortic valve replacement
(AVR) – regardless of whether or not AS symptoms are evident. The merit of carrying out a
concomitant AVR is less clear for those with mild or moderate AS.
Cardiac catheterization is only indicated in AS for two reasons: (1) to perform coronary
angiography before AVR in patients with risk factors for CAD; (2) to assess the severity of AS in
symptomatic patients when AVR is planned or when noninvasive tests are inconclusive
(catheterization allows accurate quantification of the orifice because it can account for
transvalvular flow).
Contrary to popular belief, exercise testing is not contraindicated for mild to moderate AS
patients and can give useful information with respect to exercise capacity, heart rate recovery,
and exercise-induced rise in blood pressure.
Balloon valvotomy
Percutaneous balloon aortic valvotomy (stretching a stenotic valve by balloon inflation) has an
important role to play in the treatment of young adults with AS, but a very limited role in older
2
patients. This is because the postoperative valve area is rarely >1 cm and because complications
are frequent (10%) and serious. This procedure can act as a "bridge" to reduce the requirement
for surgery (with its inherent risk) in adult patients with refractory pulmonary edema or
cardiogenic shock.
Aortic valve replacement in the elderly
Due to the limitations of medical therapy and balloon valvotomy, AVR should be considered for
all elderly patients with symptomatic AS. However, the decision as to whether to carry out AVR
is rarely straightforward and must take into account the risks as viewed by both the surgeon and
the patient. Comorbidity in the form of LVH or CAD greatly increases the risk associated with
 3/13
 
surgery. In addition, specific valve problems, such as heavy calcification and narrow LV outflow
tract or annulus, make the procedure more complex. The decision is highly individual.
Aortic regurgitation
AR is associated with classic clinical signs (see Table 2):
waterhammer (collapsing) pulse – detected by comparing the character of the radial pulse
at the level of the heart with its character on elevation of the arm (use several fingers).
Elevation accentuates the steep rise-and-fall character of this pulse, which seems to slap
faster and harder against the fingers
Corrigan's sign – visible arterial pulsation in the neck
de Musset's sign – nodding of the head in time with the heartbeat
Duroziez's sign – caused by retrograde diastolic flow in the femoral artery. Place the
stethoscope on the femoral pulse and occlude the artery distally. The turbulent flow will be
picked up as a "to-and-fro" murmur
Quincke's sign – capillary pulsation in the nail beds that is visible on applying gentle
pressure to induce a degree of whitening
Traube's sign – a "pistol-shot" sound heard over the femoral pulse
Müller's sign – pulsation of the uvula
An early diastolic murmur is heard at the left lower sternal edge when the patient is sitting
forward and holding his or her breath in expiration. There could also be a coexistent aortic
systolic flow murmur, caused by the large stroke volume (rather than reflecting organic AS).
There may be a mid diastolic murmur at the apex (Austin Flint murmur) caused by the
regurgitant aortic jet vibrating the anterior mitral valve (MV) leaflet.
Acute aortic regurgitation
Acute AR is one hallmark of aortic dissection and is a medical emergency in its own right. A
large regurgitant volume is suddenly imposed on an LV of normal size that has not had time to
accommodate to the volume overload. The result is a reduction in stroke volume, compensatory
tachycardia, pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic shock. Characteristic clinical findings are absent
and an echo is essential to document the severity of the lesion. This is done by assessing the
speed of equilibration of aortic and LV pressures in diastole. Useful echo measures are short
regurgitant wave half time, short mitral deceleration time, and premature closure of the MV.
Mortality is high in acute severe AR and early surgical intervention is essential. Nitroprusside
can be helpful in reducing preload and afterload, possibly in combination with dobutamine or
dopamine. Intra-aortic balloon pumping is absolutely contraindicated (it increases aortic diastolic
pressure and worsens the regurgitation), while β-blockers, often used in the management of
dissection, should be used with caution in associated acute severe AR as they dampen the
compensatory tachycardia.
Chronic aortic regurgitation
An early diastolic murmur is always justification for referral to a cardiologist for assessment and
echo.
Causes
Rheumatic involvement of the aortic valve, resulting in thickening of the cusps and fusion
of the commissures – the valve neither opens nor closes completely.
 4/13
 
Dilatation of the aortic root resulting from aneurysm of the ascending aorta – this is
commonly seen in Marfan's syndrome.
Dilatation of the aortic annulus can also result from connective tissue disease, such as
ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Reiter's syndrome, relapsing polychondritis,
or systemic lupus erythematosus.
Dissecting aneurysm involving the aortic root.
Syphilitic aortitis causing aortic aneurysm and dilatation of the valve ring that may involve
the coronary ostia.
Table 2 outlines the causes of aortic regurgitation.
Natural history and therapeutic options
Chronic AR represents a condition of combined volume and pressure overload on the LV. The
ejection fraction (EF) – the percentage of the end diastolic volume ejected during systole – is
maintained by compensatory LVH and the majority of patients remain in this compensated phase
for decades. However, in time, the EF drops. Although initially this is fully reversible, soon, due
to progressive dilatation and remodeling, full recovery with AVR is out of reach. A large number
of studies have identified LV systolic dysfunction and end systolic dimension as the key
determinants of survival in patients undergoing AVR for AR. Thus, in contrast to AS, the critical
point when the benefit of AVR outweighs the risk is determined not by symptoms, but by echo-
determined LV function. More specifically, AVR is indicated in:
patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV symptoms (see Chapter
7, Heart failure) and preserved LV systolic function – defined as normal EF (≥50% at rest)
patients with NYHA class II symptoms and preserved LV systolic function at rest, but with
progressive LV dilatation, declining rest EF, or declining effort tolerance (the trend is more
important than the absolute level)
patients with angina on walking or climbing stairs rapidly
asymptomatic or symptomatic patients with mild to moderate LV dysfunction at rest (EF
25%–49%)
patients undergoing open chest surgery for another reason (eg, bypass grafting)
Exercise testing can be useful in AR if the patient is sedentary or has equivocal symptoms. It
assesses functional capacity and the hemodynamic effects of exercise. Radionuclide
ventriculography should be used if the echo window is poor. Cardiac catheterization is only
required in patients at risk of CAD prior to AVR or where other tests are equivocal.
Asymptomatic patients with no LV dysfunction should be encouraged to participate in all forms
of normal daily activity, including exercise (although lifting weights should be avoided).
Vasodilator therapy can, in theory, retard the natural history of chronic AR by reducing the
regurgitant volume. However, very few studies have actually examined the effect of this
treatment on the long-term outcome. Indications for vasodilator therapy (generally using long-
acting nifedipine) are:
long-term therapy in patients with severe regurgitation who have symptoms and/or LV
dysfunction, when surgery is not recommended
long-term therapy in asymptomatic patients with severe regurgitation who have LV
dilatation, but normal systolic function
 5/13
 
long-term therapy in asymptomatic patients with hypertension and any degree of
regurgitation
long-term therapy in patients with persistent LV systolic dysfunction after AVR
(angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor)
short-term therapy to improve the hemodynamic profile of patients with severe heart
failure symptoms and severe LV dysfunction before proceeding with AVR
Asymptomatic patients with mild AR and normal LV systolic function should be seen by a
cardiologist annually and undergo echo every 2–3 years. Asymptomatic patients with normal
systolic function, but severe AR and significant LV dilatation (end diastolic diameter >6 cm),
require more frequent evaluation. These patients should be seen by a cardiologist every 6 months
and undergo echo every 6–12 months.
Mitral stenosis
The MV apparatus consists of three components: two leaflets, the fibrous annulus, and the
chordae tendineae, which connect the leaflets to the papillary muscles (see Figure 1). The
anterior leaflet is larger than the posterior leaflet (see Figure 2). The normal area of the MV
orifice is 4–5 cm2. Symptoms of mitral stenosis (MS) develop when the orifice is <2.5 cm2 and a
2
critical stenosis occurs when it is approximately 1 cm (see Figure 3). The signs and causes of
MS are outlined in Table 3.
Figure 1
The structure of the mitral valve apparatus.
Figure 2
A calcified mitral valve posterior leaflet in diastole.
Figure 3
Mitral stenosis with left atrial dilatation. This figure shows a
thickened mital valve arrow. The spontaneous contrast is a
good illustration of the thrombogenicity of the blood in the
left atrium. This is believed to be the first step before the
formation (more...)
Table 3
Common murmurs in mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation
with their associated signs and causes.
Causes
Rheumatic heart disease is the most common cause of MS, although it pre-dates the symptoms
by at least 10 years. Other acquired causes are rare – eg, annular calcification, endocarditis, or
granulomatous infiltration in association with eosinophilia.
Signs
Symptoms of MS generally occur during exertion, infection, stress, or with the onset of atrial
fibrillation (AF) with a rapid ventricular response. This is because a left atrial (LA) pressure that
 6/13
 
is normal at rest rises with an increase in transmitral flow or a decrease in the diastolic filling
time.
The most common manifestation is breathlessness, but a reduction in exercise tolerance or
symptoms of right-sided congestion can also occur. The typical physical signs are described in
Table 4. Figure 4 demonstrates MS in echo, electrocardiography pressure tracing, and a chest x-
ray.
Table 4
The typical physical signs of mitral stenosis.
Figure 4
Mitral stenosis demonstrated by (a) echocardiography
(showing thickened leaflets that no longer open), (b)
electrocardiography pressure tracing in the left atrium versus
left ventricle demonstrating the gradient between the two
cavities (and therefore (more...)
Natural history
The disease takes a slow course with progressive acceleration later in life. In developed
countries, the lag period from the time of rheumatic fever to the onset of symptoms is 20–40
years, and there is another 10 years before these symptoms become disabling. The 10-year
survival rate is high for asymptomatic patients (>80%), but low for those with symptoms (0%–
2
15%). Asymptomatic patients with mild MS (MV area >1.5 cm ) require no further evaluation
and do not need to be followed up more than annually.
Percutaneous and surgical therapy
Decisions on therapy are made by joint consideration of symptoms and MV morphology
(including hemodynamics and pulmonary artery pressure). Therapeutic options include MV
repair (open/closed commissurotomy), MV replacement, and percutaneous valvotomy.
Both repair and percutaneous valvotomy acutely result in a doubling of the valve area and a 60%
reduction in transmitral gradient. However, open commissurotomy and percutaneous valvotomy
produce better long-term hemodynamic results. The current recommendations for percutaneous
and surgical therapy are outlined in Table 5.
Table 5
Current recommendations for surgical therapy.
Medical therapy
Prophylaxis against rheumatic fever and endocarditis should be considered for all patients with
MS. Agents with negative chronotropic properties, such as β-blockers or calcium-channel
blockers, may benefit those in sinus rhythm with symptoms relating to exertional tachycardia.
Atrial fibrillation
AF develops in 40% of patients with symptomatic MS and should be treated according to
standard protocols (see Chapter 8, Arrhythmia). The value of anticoagulation therapy for those
with AF and those with a prior embolic event with or without AF is clear. However, there is no
evidence that oral anticoagulation is beneficial in those with MS who have neither AF nor a prior
embolic event. The frequency of embolic events does not seem to be related to the severity of
MS, the size of the LA, or the presence of symptoms. There is some controversy over whether
 7/13
 
percutaneous mitral valvotomy should be performed in patients with new-onset AF and moderate
or severe MS who are otherwise asymptomatic.
Mitral regurgitation
Acute mitral regurgitation
In acute severe mitral regurgitation (MR), the hemodynamic changes are not tolerated and the
result is generally acute decompensation. Without time for compensatory LV and LA dilatation,
the increase in ventricular preload leads to a decreased stroke volume and pulmonary congestion.
However, examination findings may not be typical:
there may be no hyperdynamic apex beat
the systolic murmur may be short
there may be a fourth heart sound
The most common cause of acute MR is papillary muscle rupture secondary to myocardial
infarction (MI) (see Figure 5). In this situation, the principal differential diagnosis is ventricular
septal defect and an echo is required to differentiate between the two. Ventricular septal defect is
more likely with:
Figure 5
(a) Transesophageal echocardiography showing a tear in the
papillary muscle (the most common cause of acute mitral
regurgitation). (b) The same scene with a color jet from the
left ventricle into the left atrium, demonstrating "blood flow"
in the wrong (more...)
right-sided radiation of murmur
raised jugular venous pressure (JVP)
anterior MI (inferior MI is more likely to cause acute MR)
The goal of medical therapy in acute severe MR is to diminish regurgitation, increase stroke
volume, and reduce pulmonary congestion. As such, nitroprusside alone or in combination with
dobutamine (if blood pressure is low) can be effective. Intra-aortic balloon pumping can also
help to achieve these goals. In many cases, emergency surgery is warranted. If so, prior
transesophageal echo helps to characterize the anatomy and severity of the lesion. Cardiac
catheterization should be performed if the patient is at high risk for CAD.
Chronic mitral regurgitation
Causes
Degenerative MV disease is common in the elderly. The valve leaflets are thickened,
redundant, increased in area, and they prolapse into the LA in systole. The chordae may
become elongated, thinned, and tortuous – predisposing to rupture.
Infective endocarditis is a major cause of chronic MR. Vegetations developing on the cusp
vary from small nodules along the line of apposition to large friable masses of up to 10
mm or more (see Figure 6). "Jet" lesions on the anterior cusp of the MV can also occur in
association with aortic valve endocarditis.
Ischemia.
 8/13
 
Figure 6
Echocardiogram showing a vegetation on the mitral valve
(arrow).
Clinical signs
The clinical signs of chronic MR are outlined in Table 6. With severe MR, the regurgitant
murmur is usually short and stops at the same time as aortic valve closure. Occasionally, the
murmur can hardly be heard due to early equalization of atrioventricular pressures. The signs and
causes of MR are outlined in Table 3.
Table 6
The clinical signs of chronic mitral regurgitation.
Natural history
In chronic MR, the increased preload and decreased afterload of the LV (caused by ejection of
some of the stroke volume into the LA) are compensated for by LV and LA dilatation, and the
total stroke volume is increased (the EF is also maintained). This compensated phase of chronic
MR may last for years. Eventually, however, the volume overload causes sufficient dilatation to
push the LV onto the downward portion of the Frank–Starling curve and dysfunction results (see
Figure 7). Importantly, the loading conditions mean that this dysfunction might not be reflected
in an abnormal EF (the EF in a patient with MR and normal LV function is >60%).
Figure 7
Frank–Starling curve showing left ventricular (LV)
dysfunction.
Asymptomatic patients with mild MR and no evidence of LV dilatation or dysfunction can be
followed on a yearly basis and undergo echo less frequently than that. Asymptomatic patients
with moderate MR should have an echo annually. Asymptomatic patients with severe MR should
be followed up every 6–12 months and undergo echo to detect silent LV dysfunction. Exercise
testing is useful to document changes in exercise tolerance.
The timing of surgery is determined by the EF, LV end systolic dimension (LVESD), the
presence of AF, and symptoms. It is indicated for those with:
class II–IV symptoms, EF >60%, LVESD <45 mm
EF 30%–60%, LVESD 45–55 mm (regardless of symptoms)
asymptomatic patients with AF and normal EF
symptomatic patients with normal EF and pulmonary hypertension (>50 mm Hg)
asymptomatic patients with EF 50%–60% and LVESD <45 mm, or EF >60% and LVESD
45–55 mm
patients with EF <30% and/or LVESD >55 mm in whom the chordae tendineae are likely
to be intact (ie, no previous MI in that territory)
The operation of choice is MV repair. In many patients, however, replacement of the valve
together with removal of part or all of the MV apparatus (chordae) is required. The repair
procedure leads to better postoperative LV function and survival.
 9/13
 
There is no generally accepted medical therapy for chronic MR. Although vasodilators might
seem a sensible choice, in fact, in compensated chronic MR the afterload is decreased (since the
LV has two routes of ejection); as such, drugs that reduce the afterload further are unlikely to be
beneficial.
Chronic MR can also occur due to a primary ischemic cause, relating either to LV dysfunction or
to chordal ischemia – revascularization or stenting can eliminate the episodes.
Functional mitral regurgitation
The normal function of the MV depends on the cusps, ring, and subvalvular apparatus, including
papillary muscle fibers and the circumferential muscle layer supporting the mitral ring. Each of
these components plays a significant role in maintaining the competence of the valve. With
papillary muscle dysfunction due to ischemia or other causes of ventricular disease, cusp closure
is not complete, leading to some degree of regurgitation. This can even occur, for example, in
athletic hypertrophy. This is usually mild, but can be significant in rare cases. In such conditions,
the heart rate is usually fast and the duration of MR long enough to compromise filling time and
hence cardiac output. Although functional in origin, it can be hemodynamically significant.
Alfred de Musset
a
"La bouche garde le silence, Pour écouter parler le coeur."
Alfred de Musset (1810–1857), La Nuit de Mai
The French romantic poet and playwright, Alfred de Musset (1810–1857), was famous for
both his creative brain and his pathological heart. His most inspiring work was prompted
by the ending of a love affair he had with George Sand (a French romantic writer who later
had a 10-year relationship with Chopin). During a visit to Venice in 1834, both Sand and he
became very unwell. Such was the quality of care and attention lavished on them by their
physician that Sand fell in love with this man and de Musset returned to France alone
(where he penned some of his best work). He spent the last 2 years of his life housebound,
his heart broken by the combined effects of lost love, aortic regurgitation, and alcohol-
related cardiomyopathy. The nodding of his head in time with his heartbeat, the classic
eponymous sign of aortic regurgitation, was described by his brother in a biography. When
told of it, de Musset apparently placed his thumb and forefinger on his neck and his head
stopped bobbing.
a
The mouth keeps silent to hear the heart speak.
Mitral valve prolapse
MV prolapse (MVP) is the single most common valvular abnormality. It affects 2%–6% of the
population and is defined as a backward movement of one or both leaflets of the MV (usually the
anterior) into the LA during (ventricular) systole. In most cases it is associated with trivial MR.
However, as a result of its prevalence, it is also the most common single cause of significant MR.
Although MVP does not alter life expectancy, all of the above complications of MR can occur.
Sudden death, often reported as an association with MVP, is rare (<2% on long-term follow-up).
Classic findings on auscultation are a mid systolic click followed by a late systolic murmur. The
click is thought to be caused by a tensing of the MV apparatus as the leaflets prolapse into the
LA. The murmur is usually high pitched and loudest at the apex. Certain maneuvers can help to
secure the diagnosis: standing reduces end diastolic volume (EDV), bringing the click–murmur
 10/13
 
nearer to the first heart sound; squatting increases EDV (and afterload), moving the click–
murmur nearer to the second heart sound.
Patients with these findings should be referred for echo assessment. Interestingly, there is no
absolute consensus on criteria for diagnosing MVP on two-dimensional echo. The diagnosis
should never be made on one view alone (especially if that is the 4-chamber view). Serial echos
are not necessary unless there is a change in the clinical picture.
Management involves reassurance and prophylaxis for endocarditis. Patients who suffer from
palpitations should have Holter/event monitoring to make a firm diagnosis. Aspirin is
recommended for patients with documented focal neurological events who are in sinus rhythm
and have no atrial thrombus. Recurrent transient ischemic attacks or stroke in MVP patients
demand long-term warfarin therapy. Ultimately, MV repair may be required, and the indications
are as for MR (described above).
Tricuspid valve disease
In comparison with the left side, the right side of the heart is a low-pressure system.
Consequently, disorders such as endocarditis, in which high-pressure jets help to "seed" the
infective vegetations, occur less frequently. The notable exception is in intravenous drug abusers,
where right-sided endocarditis is more common. Perhaps the most common cause of tricuspid
valve incompetence, however, is elevated right ventricular (RV) pressure, secondary to
pulmonary hypertension, MS, pulmonary stenosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, or RV failure. In
addition, rheumatic heart disease can affect the tricuspid valve and tends to produce a
combination of tricuspid stenosis and regurgitation – the overriding symptoms are those of
regurgitation. Ebstein's anomaly is a congenital disorder affecting the tricuspid valve (see
Chapter 14, Adult congenital heart disease).
Clinical signs
Physical examination is key to the diagnosis of tricuspid regurgitation. Typical signs are:
gross fluid retention
significant peripheral edema
ascites that may result in nausea
raised JVP with a prominent systolic wave and sharp Y descent
parasternal heave and loud P2, suggesting pulmonary hypertension as a cause
an enlarged, tender, pulsatile liver and, occasionally, mild jaundice
a pansystolic murmur at the left lower sternal edge that is increased by inspiration
Management
Severe tricuspid regurgitation resulting from any cause is associated with a poor long-term
outcome due to RV dysfunction and systemic venous congestion. The timing of surgery and the
most suitable operation remain controversial, although chordal reconstruction and annuloplasty
have become established in recent years. Annuloplasty involves the use of a prosthetic ring to
support the endogenous dilated annulus. Valve replacement is also possible.
Medical management treats fluid retention and AF. Standard protocols are used, although high
doses and combination diuretics are often required.
Pulmonary valve disease
 11/13
 
Pulmonary regurgitation is caused by pulmonary hypertension and annular dilatation resulting
from various causes of left-sided heart disease (as well as primary pulmonary hypertension). An
early diastolic murmur (Graham Steell murmur) is heard over the pulmonary area and should be
distinguished from that of AR.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is only required if the cause is rheumatic. Most pulmonary valve disease
does not need treatment. However, valve replacement can be carried out in cases of intractable
right heart failure.
Valve disease in pregnancy
In pregnancy, there is a 50% increase in circulating blood volume. The cardiac output peaks
between the second and third trimesters, predominantly due to an increase in stroke volume,
although the heart rate also increases by up to 20%. Total peripheral resistance falls
disproportionately, reducing the diastolic blood pressure and widening the pulse pressure.
Occasionally, in the supine position the inferior vena cava can be compressed by a gravid uterus,
leading to an abrupt decrease in venous return. This can result in light headedness, but quickly
resolves on changing position. The increased blood volume and cardiac output can accentuate
stenotic murmurs, while the lowered peripheral resistance can actually reduce regurgitant
murmurs. In general, echo demonstrates a degree of "physiological" chamber enlargement that,
in a significant minority of women, may be associated with functional MR.
In some conditions (eg, cyanotic heart disease, Eisenmenger syndrome, and severe pulmonary
hypertension), the changes resulting from pregnancy greatly increase risk and most cardiologists
would counsel against pregnancy. The following are also associated with increased risk, either to
the mother or fetus:
severe AS
MR/AR with class III–IV symptoms
MS with class II–IV symptoms
pulmonary pressures >75% of systemic
EF <40%
mechanical prosthetic valves requiring anticoagulation
AR in Marfan's syndrome
Although risk is increased, many patients with valvular abnormalities can be managed through
pregnancy with conservative medical measures aimed at optimizing intravascular volume.
Mitral stenosis
Penicillin prophylaxis should be continued in pregnant women with MS. The cautious use of
diuretics and β-blockers in those with mild to moderate disease can prevent tachycardia and
optimize diastolic filling. For women with severe disease, a percutaneous balloon valvotomy
prior to conception should be considered. Those who develop class III–IV symptoms during
pregnancy should also undergo valvotomy. This can be achieved with very limited fluoroscopy
or appropriate shielding.
Mitral regurgitation
The usual cause of MR is MVP; this rarely requires treatment.
Aortic stenosis
 12/13
 
The most likely cause of AS in a woman of childbearing age is congenital bicuspid disease. Mild
to moderate obstruction can be managed conservatively throughout pregnancy, whereas those
with severe disease (eg, gradient >50 mm Hg, LV function likely to be normal) should be advised
to delay conception until treatment is obtained.
Aortic regurgitation
AR can usually be managed medically with a combination of diuretics and vasodilator therapy.
As with MR, surgery should be contemplated during pregnancy for the control of class III–IV
symptoms.
Anticoagulation in pregnancy
Warfarin crosses the placenta and has been associated with an increased incidence of
spontaneous abortion, fetal deformity, prematurity, and stillbirth. The incidence is probably
around 5%–10%. In contrast, heparin does not cross the placenta and is generally safer. However,
it is associated with a higher degree of thromboembolic complications. The evidence base for
decision making is not good, and the decision should be made in partnership with the patient
after explaining the risks involved. Most change from warfarin to heparin at week 36 in
anticipation of labor.