=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ΕΙΣΑΓΩΓΙΚΑ.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:38:16.537290",
  "file_size_bytes": 8522747,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Textbooks",
  "source_folder": "Textbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Textbooks/ΕΙΣΑΓΩΓΙΚΑ.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Pocket Cardiology and
Robert K. Riezebos, MD,
The pocket Cardiology and Vascular Medicine is
PhD, Cardiologist:
a compact and practical handbook for everyone
´pocket Cardiology: your Vascular Medicine
in healthcare. It covers the fundamentals before
trusted compass guiding you
delving into cardiology-specific diagnostics and
through every twist and turn
conditions. The pocket concludes with a chapter
of your professional journey Romée Snijders & Veerle Smit
on clinical reasoning and appendices providing
algorithms for managing arrhythmia and cardiac in cardiology.´ Paul Hendriks
arrest.
Prof. Fabian Knebel, MD, Assured
We used our Compendium Method© to write PhD, Cardiologist:
this pocket. The method consists of compre- ´A very smart, contemporary, quality
hensible illustrations for every medical condi- and up-to-date book of
tion, straightforward tables, icons, and useful high-quality level. For both
by
experts
mnemonics. This method is designed to be visu- students and doctors!´
al, to the point and concise, all while maintaining
the highest quality standards through rigorous Alan J. Robertson, MD,
supervision by medical specialists. Cardiologist:
´A comprehensive overview of
Curious about our journey? Explore our website Cardiology in a clear and very
and connect with us on social media to learn more.
easily digestible format.´
Our story
As medical students, we felt
overwhelmed by the amount
of medical knowledge availa-
ble. An overview was lacking.
Fueled by this need for
change, we embarked on a
journey that has now brought
together over 500 students
and doctors to create the
entire Compendium Medicine
book series. Our mission is to
help and connect healthcare
Compendium professionals globally by pro-
viding accessible knowledge. medicine
Romée Snijders & Veerle Smit
Founders and doctors
An essential pocket-sized book on Cardiology and
Vascular Medicine.
99iS77B88N99 9007888-9330-0083553007884099-088-0
www.compendiummedicine.com
Romée
Snijders
&
Veerle
Smit
Cardiology
and
Vascular
Medicine
Compendium
Medicine
--- Страница 2 ---
The Compendium Method©
Conditions
Each condition in this pocket starts with a full-sentence definition fol-
Manual lowed by a telegram-style explanation. For each condition, the following
icons (as applicable) are discussed. These visual cues that convey specific
In Compendium Medicine we use the same concise, visual and schemat- attributes or features of the condition are also useful when studying. You
ic description of the various medical specialties. Everything is geared can cover the text and quiz yourself.
towards overview and structure, facilitating study and practice. We call
D Definition Tx Treatment
this the Compendium Method ©.
E Epidemiology General
Ae Aetiology Paramedical care
Fixed layout
R Risk factors Pharmacological treatment
All our medical specialties are presented in the same, recognisable way
Hx Patient history Invasive, non-pharmacological
and each has its own colour and icon. The pockets have a fixed chapter
PE Physical examination treatment
structure. The table of contents of each pocket tells you exactly which
Dx Diagnostics P Prognosis
topics are covered. The symbols in the corner of the page show what kind
! Watch out/don´t forget
of information is being discussed.
Tables
a ATLS a Diagnostics a Appendices We use tables to arrange the information in a clear and structured man-
a Anatomy a Treatment a References ner, with columns representing different conditions and rows indicating
a Physiology a Differential diagnosis a Abbreviations features or characteristics. Centered formatting for matching features
a Patient history a Conditions a Index makes it easy to identify similarities and differences.
a Physical examination a Clinical reasoning
Illustrations
The figures provide at-a-glance insight
A B
into topics like anatomy or the typi-
cal patient. They are also intended for C
study and practice, such as checking D Diagrams
whether you can identify the letters in a = positive/yes/+ = negative/no/-
picture without looking at the caption.
Diagrams help you reason clinically, starting from a particular symp-
Figure 21 // Location of PMI of valvular murmers tom, using the green and red arrows as signposts. Always remember
A: Aortic valve B: Pulmonary valve C: Tricuspid that the full differential diagnosis may consist of additional diagnoses.
valve D: Mitral valve
2
//
dohtem
muidnepmoC
3
//
dohtem
muidnepmoC
--- Страница 3 ---
Fun fact: our founders are Dutch, and in the Netherlands,
we refer to a mnemonic as a “donkey bridge”. That’s why
the symbol for mnemonics in our books is a donkey.
Icons & frames Index
Throughout this pocket you will find highlighted frames. The pockets include a comprehensive and easy-to-use index. It contains
all the topics covered in the books so you can quickly navigate and find
the information you are looking for.
QR code Note Reference to
another chapter
Alarm! Description of Appendices
the typical patient Mnemonic In the pockets, you will find space for your notes, additional information,
Formula
reminders, or insights. In addition, handy appendices have been added;
these contain specific information that you would like to have at hand and
are therefore located at the back of the pockets.
Punctuation marks
The punctuation in our books also focuses on overview and ensures that
They/theirs
the subject matters are covered concisely and effectively.
We realise that sex and gender identity are not binary and that there is
more variation than just ‘woman’ or ‘man’. For readability’s sake (as well as
Rare Most common L Decrease/detoriation for grammatical reasons) we have therefore chosen to use the pronouns
Uncommon I Consequence ♀ Female sex ‘they/theirs’, regardless of sex or gender identity.
Very common K Increase/improvement ♂ Male sex
Warning
When studying this pocket, be mindful of the protocols within your
Abbreviations own facility and adhere to the established guidelines. It is also essen-
We make extensive use of abbreviations, medical terms and symbols for tial to understand the circumstances under which you may or may not
scientific units and quantities. Below are some examples of the abbrevia- provide assistance in a given country, as this can potentially have legal
tions used in this pocket. consequences.
Want to know more about
sec second/seconds d day/days min. minimum
the Compendium Method ©?
min minute/minutes wk week/weeks max. maximum Scan the QR code.
h hour/hours mo month/months e.g. for example
y year/years L litre/litres
4
//
dohtem
muidnepmoC
5
//
dohtem
muidnepmoC
--- Страница 4 ---
Table of contents
Cardiology and Vascular
Medicine
ATLS 18 branes system 38 tests 62 graphy (CT) 89
ABCDE approach 18 Mental health system 38 Proteins 64 Cardiac MRI 90
Secondary survey 23 Cardiovascular history 38 Inflammatory markers 65 Cardiac nuclear imaging 92
Anatomy 24 Chest pain 39 Renal function tests 67 Cardiac catheterisation 93
Heart 24 Palpitations 39 Acute kidney disease - Treatment 94
Valves 25 Syncope 39 interpretation 68 General 94
Circulation 26 Dyspnoea 39 Clotting markers 68 Lifestyle management 94
Conduction system 26 Physical examination 40 Miscellaneous 70 Smoking 94
Vasculature of the heart 27 General inspection 40 Iron panel 71 Physical activity 94
Coronary arteries 27 Anthropometric data 41 Iron status - inter- Nutrition and lipid
Cardiac veins 28 Pulse 41 pretation 72 management 94
Innervation of the heart 29 MEWS 42 Lipid profile 72 BMI 94
Arterial system 29 General physical examination 42 Cardiac markers 73 Pharmacological treatment 96
Venous system 31 Head and neck 42 Cardiovascular diagnostics 74 Analgesics 96
Physiology 34 Thorax 44 Hyperoxia test 74 Opioids 96
Cardiac cycle 34 Lungs 44 Electrocardiogram (ECG) 74 Anticoagulants 98
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone Heart 45 Cardiac axis 80 Duration of antiplatelet
(RAA) system 35 Heart rate 46 Heart rhythm 81 therapy 100
Patient history 36 Heart sounds 46 ECG abnormalities 81 INR 102
General patient history 36 Murmurs 46 Holter monitor 82 Bridging 102
Review of systems 37 Abdomen 49 Stress testing 83 Diuretics 104
General system 37 Extremities 49 Electrophysiological studies 83 Beta blockers 106
Circulatory system 37 Diagnostics 52 Imaging 83 Calcium antagonists 106
Respiratory system 37 Lab values 52 Chest X-ray 83 RAS inhibitors 108
Digestive system 37 General blood count 52 Echocardiography 84 Other heart failure
Urogenital system 37 Anaemia - interpretation 54 Transthoracic echocardio- medication 109
Endocrine system 37 Arterial blood gas (ABG) 55 graphy (TTE) 85 Blood glucose-lowering
Locomotor system 38 Blood gas - inter- Transoesophageal echo- agents 110
Haematology system 38 pretation 57 cardiography (TOE) 88 Antiarrhythmics 112
Central nervous system 38 Electrolytes 58 Stress echocardiography 88 Cardiac glycosides 113
Skin and mucous mem- Liver tests and pancreatic Cardiac computed tomo- Nitrates 115
--- Страница 5 ---
Table of contents
Cardiology and Vascular
Medicine
Lipid-lowering agents 116 Psychiatric 134 arteriosus (PDA) 140 Atherosclerosis 161
Cardiovascular risk Increased stroke volume 134 Congenital pulmonary Ischaemic heart disease 164
management 118 Miscellaneous 134 stenosis 142 Ischaemic heart disease 164
Primary hypertension 120 Syncope 134 Congenital aortic valve Chronic coronary
Benzodiazepines 120 Cardiac 134 stenosis 142 syndrome 164
Antibiotics 122 Orthostatic 135 Aortic coarctation 142 Ischaemia with non
Drug nomenclature 126 Reflex syncope 135 Eisenmenger’s syndrome 144 occlusive coronary
Invasive non-pharmaco- Dyspnoea 135 Hypertension 145 arteries 164
logical treatment 128 Cardiac 135 Arterial hypertension 145 Unstable angina
Ablation 128 Pulmonary 135 Primary hypertension 148 pectoris 168
Electric cardioversion and Psychiatric 135 Primary hyper- Non-ST elevation myo-
defibrillation 128 Compensatory hyperven- aldosteronism 148 cardial infarction
Percutaneous coronary tilation in metabolic Pheochromocytoma 148 (NSTEMI) 168
intervention (PCI) 129 alkalosis 135 Renovascular hyper- ST elevation myocardial
Pacemaker 129 Anaphylaxis 135 tension 149 infarction (STEMI) 168
Internal cardioverter- Miscellaneous 135 Hypertension in chronic Arrhythmia and conduction
defibrillator (ICD) 130 Conditions 136 kidney disease (CKD) 149 disorders 170
Differential diagnosis 132 Congenital heart defects 136 Hypertensive Arrhythmia 170
Chest pain (CP) 132 Congenital heart defects 136 emergency 149 Re-entry 171
Cardiac 132 Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) 136 Pulmonary hypertension 154 Supraventricular arrhythmia 173
Musculoskeletal 132 Transposition of the Dyslipidaemia 157 Atrial fibrillation 174
Gastrointestinal 133 great arteries (TGA) 136 Dyslipidaemia 157 Atrial flutter 174
Vascular 133 Hypoplastic left heart Familial combined hyper- Atrial tachycardia 174
Skin condition 133 syndrome 136 lipidaemia (FCH) 158 AV re-entry tachycardia
Pulmonary 133 Patent foramen ovale Familial hyper- (AVRT) 175
Psychiatric 134 (PFO) 139 triglyceridemia 158 AV nodal re-entry
Palpitations 134 Atrial septum defect Familial dysbetalipopro- tachycardia (AVNRT) 175
Cardiac 134 (ASD) 139 teinemia (FD) 159 AV-junctional
Drug-induced 134 Ventricular septum Familial hypercholes- tachycardia 175
Intoxication 134 defect (VSD) 140 terolaemia (FH) 159 Sinus bradycardia 177
Metabolic 134 Persistent ductus Atherosclerosis 161 Sinus arrest 177
--- Страница 6 ---
Table of contents
Cardiology and Vascular
Medicine
Sick sinus syndrome 178 (AS) 192 Takotsubo cardio- References 256
Wolff-Parkinson-White Mitral valve regurgi- myopathy 209 Illustrations & figures 260
syndrome (WPW) 180 tation (MR) 193 Heart failure 212 Epilogue 261
Ventricular arrhythmia 181 Mitral valve stenosis Heart failure (HF) 212 About us 264
Ventricular fibrillation 182 (MS) 193 Heart failure with pre- Compendium Compass 266
Ventricular flutter 182 Pulmonary valve served ejection Abbreviations 268
Ventricular tachycardia 183 regurgitation 196 fraction (HFpEF) 214 Index 272
Torsade de pointes 183 Pulmonary valve Heart failure with
AV block 182 stenosis (PS) 196 reduced ejection
First-degree AV block 184 Tricuspid valve fraction (HFrEF) 214
Second-degree type I regurgitation (TR) 197 Acute heart failure 215
AV block/Wenckebach 184 Tricuspid valve Clinical reasoning 218
Second-degree type II stenosis (TS) 197 Chest pain 218
AV block/Mobitz type II 185 Infections 198 Syncope 220
Third-degree AV block 185 Infective endocarditis (IE) 198 Secondary hypertension 222
Bundle branch block (BBB) 184 Pericarditis 201 Appendices 224
Right bundle branch Myocarditis 203 Appendix 1: Systematic ECG
block (RBBB) 187 Cardiomyopathies 204 assessment 224
Left bundle branch Cardiomyopathy 204 Appendix 2: Chest X-ray 229
block (LBBB) 187 Dilated cardiomyo- Appendix 3: CPR 236
Left anterior hemiblock 187 pathy 208 Basic Life Support (BLS) 236
Left posterior hemi- Non-dilated left ventri- Advanced Life Support
block 187 cular cardiomyopathy (ALS) 241
Extrasystoles 187 (NDLVC) 208 ALS algorithm
Brugada syndrome 188 Hypertrophic cardio- medication 246
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) 189 myopathy (HCM) 208 Reversible causes 247
Valvular heart disease 190 Arrhythmogenic right Post-resuscitation treatment 249
Valvular heart disease 190 ventricular cardio- Special circumstances 252
Aortic valve regurgi- myopathy (ARVC) 209 Appendix 4: Acute care
tation (AR) 192 Restrictive cardio- tachycardia and bradycardia 253
Aortic valve stenosis myopathy 209
--- Страница 7 ---
Anatomy Figure 3 // Cross-section of the
heart
S A: Superior vena cava B: Right
A R pulmonary artery C: Right pul-
Q monary veins D: Pulmonary valve
Heart B P E ca: vR a i Ggh : Tt ria ct ur siu pm id vF a: l vI en Hfe :r Cio hr ov rden aea
Figure 1 // Anterior view of the tendinae I: Right ventricle J: In-
heart C O terventricular septum K: Papillary
A L A pu: lS mu op ne ar rio y r a v rte en ra y c Ca :v a R igB h: tR pig uh l-t D MN m vau lvs ec le N L :: L Mef it t rv ae l nt vr aic lvle e M O: :A o Lr eti fc t
K monary veins D: Right atrial ap- E L atrium P: Left pulmonary veins
B J p F:e n Ad pa eg xe G E : : L eIn ftf e cr oio ror nv ae rn ya a rc ta ev ra y K Q m: o nL ae rf yt tp ruu nlm k o Sn : a Ar oy rta ir ct e ar ry c hR: Pul-
I H: Left atrial appendage I: Pul-
C monary trunk J: Left pulmonary F J
H veins K: Left pulmonary artery G
D G L: Aortic arch H I
Valves
E A Q F Ai :g u Dr ie a s4 to / l/ e H Be :a r Pt uva lmlv oe ns ary valve
F B DC
E
R S P C rio: rR sig eh mt ils ue nm ai rl u cn ua sr
p
c Eus
:
p
L
eD ft: A sen mte i--
O lunar cusp F: Left coronary artery
F thig e u hr ee a r2 t // Posterior view of F L G: Left atrioventricular valve (mi-
tral valve) H: Anterior mitral valve
A: Aortic arch B: Left pulmonary K leaflet I: Posterior mitral valve
A P aa tr rt ie ar ly aC p: p eP ne dr aic ga erd i Eu :m L eD ft: vL ee nft -
G
H M N l ae ta rifl oe vt
e
nJ:
t
rC ico ur lao rn ar vy
a
ls vi en us
(
tK ri:
c
uR sig ph idt
O tricle F: Apex G: Right ventricle I valve) L: Anterior tricuspid valve
CB N H sin: uIn sf e Jri :o r R v igen ha t c aa tv ria u I m: C o Kr :o n La er fy t J l le ea afl fle et
t
NM
:
:
P
oS se tp et ra iol rt tr ric icu us sp pid
id
vv aa ll vv ee
D C M KL vN Oa v eet : :r ni i n Au asm r R ctM ei ag r vih: aaL t lL: le igf ptR a ui mpg lmuh elt o nm tn o Pap n r :u y a S l rm uy pao v ern e t rea i in or ry ys r BT DC
E
Q R S P l P c Ne u: oa sfl nA pe
-
o ct Rr ot :O ri c
o
R:
n
v i agaR rl hi yvg t e
c
h uct Q so pc r: oo TL nr :o e a Sn f rt yya
s
r c ty co
o
ur la eo spr nt e a Sr ry y :
J O
I F L
E
H M K
F G H N
G I
J
21
ymotAnA
31
ymotAnA
--- Страница 8 ---
Diagnostics P wave: atrial depolarisation ST segment: ventricular depolarisation complete
Cardiovascular diagnostics
R R
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
An ECG is a safe, non-invasive test in which electrodes are used to measure the P T P T
electrical activity of the heart. It is important to interpret ECGs systematically. In-
dications for an ECG include palpitations, dyspnoea, chest pain (CP), epigastric
Q Q
pain, intoxication, cyanosis, syncope, reduced exercise tolerance, monitoring of S S
critically ill patients, electrolyte disturbances, follow-up of hypertension, diabe- PQ segment: conduction in the AV node T wave: ventricular repolarisation
tes mellitus (DM) and heart disease. Allergy for ECG electrodes is a relative con-
traindication for an ECG. In these cases hypoallergenic electrodes can be used.
A standard ECG consists of 12 leads, including six limb leads that visualise the R R
frontal plane (I, II, III, aVR, aVL, aVF) and six precordial leads that visualise the axi-
al plane (V1-V6), see Figure 24. See Table 27 for the location of precordial ECG
electrodes. The leads pick up electrical activity moving towards a particular part P T P T
of the heart and project it as a deflection on the ECG. See Table 28 for an over-
view of the leads and the corresponding areas of the heart. Electrical cardiac ac- Q Q
S S
tivity moving towards the positive electrode is shown as a positive deflection on
QRS complex: ventricular depolarisation. Ventricular repolarisation complete
the ECG, while electrical activity moving away from the positive electrode is pro- Also: atrial repolarisation.
jected as a negative deflection.
QT
QTc =
√RR - interval (sec) R R
Formula 1 // QTc calculation with Bazett’s formula
P T P T
The QT interval is probably normal if QT <50% of the RR interval.
Depolarisation
Repolarisation Q Q
S S
ECG EVENT DuRATION Figure 27 // Physiology of ECG components
PR interval 120-200 ms Imaging
QRS complex 80-120 ms
♂ <350 ms Chest X-ray
QTc segment
♀ <460 ms For more information on interpreting chest X-rays (including more illustrations),
Table 29 // Duration of different ECG events in adults see Appendix 2 and Figure 29.
41
sCitsongAid
51
sCitsongAid
--- Страница 9 ---
LV LV LV
LA
LA LA
Peak systolic strain (%) Time to Peak longitudinal
strain (msec)
A4C: global longitudinal strain: -19.9%
A2C: global longitudinal strain: -27.3%
Figure 29 // Chest X-ray A3C: global longitudinal strain: -19.1%
Mean global longitudinal strain: -22.1%
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is an imaging modality of the heart using ultrasound. During
echocardiography, a transducer is placed on various positions on the thorax or in
the oesophagus to visualise the heart from different angles. It examines various Figure 30 // Strain echocardiography of a structural normal left ventricle.
aspects, such as cardiac morphology and dimensions, systolic and diastolic func- A2C, apical 2 chamber view; A3C, apical 3 chamber view; A4C, apical 4 chamber view; LA, left atrium; LV,
left ventricle
tion, valvular function, myocardial thickness and pericardial effusion. Doppler
imaging can be used to visualise blood flow, and to measure velocities or calcu-
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
late pressure differences across heart valves, or intracardiac shunts. 3D echocar-
TTE is a safe, non-invasive type of echocardiographic imaging in which a probe is
diography can be used as a modality to visualise the heart valves in more detail, or
placed on the chest. TTE is used to evaluate myocardial morphology, myocardial
to measure atrial and ventricular volumes. A more recently developed technique
function, pericardial effusion, and valvular function. During a TTE, the echo probe
in echocardiography is strain imaging (see Figure 30). Strain imaging evaluates
is placed on various places of the chest to obtain different views of the heart.
cardiac deformation or shortening of various segments of the heart during sys-
There are several standard plains that evaluate the myocardium. The parasternal
tole compared to diastole. Greater negative values indicate adequate systolic
long axis view (see Figure 31) mainly visualises the left atrium, left ventricle and
shortening and thus function.
aorta. It can be used to assess left atrial and ventricular dimensions, left ventri-
cular wall thickness and valvular function of the aortic and mitral valve. The para-
Indications for echocardiography:
sternal short axis view (see Figure 32) provides a plane through the left and right
a Flow and pressure gradient over valves (valvular heart disease)?
a Dimensions of cardiac compartments (enlargement, hypertrophy, ventricle. It can be used to assess ventricular contractility and regional wall mo-
cardiomyopathy)? tion as well as right ventricular pressure overload. The apical four chamber view
a Function of ventricles? (see Figure 33) visualises the four chambers of the heart and can be used to as-
a Regional wall motion abnormalities in an infarction? sess dimensions, volumes, systolic and diastolic function and regional wall mo-
a Fluid buildup around the heart (pericarditis, cardiac tamponade)? tion. The subcostal view (Figure 34) is obtained in supine position and visualises
a Anatomical (congenital) abnormalities? all four cavities of the heart. It is also possible to visualise pericardial effusion.
a Miscellaneous (traumatic abnormalities, abscesses in endocarditis,
masses, etc.)?
61
sCitsongAid
71
sCitsongAid
--- Страница 10 ---
The calcium score, also known as the Agatston score, is used to Cardiac MRI is a central test to diagnose the type of cardiomyopathy,
assess the extent of coronary artery calcification. This score, assigned and a very sensitive technique to detect myocardial ischaemia, old in-
based on the calcium density in Hounsfield units (HU) reflects the risk farction, and assess viability.
of a major adverse cardiac event.
Dynamic cardiac MRI is used for calculation of the ejection fraction,
Coronary CT angiography has high accuracy to exclude and detect wall motion (incl. abnormalities), and wall thickness, in particular if
coronary plaque and stenosis in patients with chest pain and lower echocardiography is inconclusive.
pretest probability.
Not all pacemakers and ICDs are MRI compatible.
Severe calcification results in ‘blooming’ which leads to overestima- See MRIsafety.com whether a technician is required
tion of stenosis degree. Depending on the scanner technology, high to turn off the implant prior to the MRI.
or irregular heart rates could result in motion or step artefacts.
Cardiac MRI
A cardiac MRI is a scan of the heart made using electromagnetic waves. It can
be used to obtain static and dynamic images of the heart, visualising ventricular
function, valvular function, myocardial pathology and quantify blood flow. A car-
diac MRI, without and with gadolinium contrast, is an excellent technique to cha-
racterise cardiac tissue, including oedema, post-infarct scarring, fibrosis, and fat
(see Figure 37 and 38). Furthermore, stress MRI can be performed by administe-
ring regadenoson or adenosine. Indications for a cardiac MRI scan include cardio-
myopathy, congenital heart disease, evaluation of the myocardium (e.g. ischae- A B C
mia, post-infarction). Cardiac MRI enables tissue characterisation by identifying Figure 37 // Short axis cardiac MRI image of a normal heart
the proportion of fat, water and fibrosis in the tissue, with a gadolinium based A: T1 weighted image B: normal perfusion during stress C: no delayed enhancement
contrast agent. Contraindications to a cardiac MRI scan may include temporary
pacemaker leads, insulin pumps and metallic foreign bodies in vivo. Relative
contraindications to an MRI scan depending on the type of intracardiac device
are pacemakers and ICDs, and claustrophobia.
For the detection of myocardial ischaemia the contrast enhancement
sequences during stress are essential. Imaging in rest is not required
for the diagnosis.
A B C
a Ischaemia: subendocardial perfusion defect, no delayed contrast
enhancement; Figure 38 // Short axis cardiac MRI image of a patient with septal infarction and ischaemia of the lateral
a Infarction: subendocardial perfusion defect and delayed contrast wall. Ischaemia is indicated by the perfusion defect of the lateral wall without delayed enhancement (white
arrows B and C). The area of infarction (orange arrow) of the LV septum is diagnosed based on hypokinesia
enhancement (indicating scarring/fibrosis) of the same region.
and wall thinning (asymmetrical myocardial contraction in A), subendocardial delayed enhancement
(hyperintense signal, B) and perfusion defect (hypointense signal, C).
81
sCitsongAid
91
sCitsongAid
--- Страница 11 ---
NB! The following pages are random
Conditions pages from this pocket. This means ISCHAEMIA WITH NON OCCLuSIVE
that many conditions are incompletely CHRONIC CORONARy CORONARy ARTERIES
represented in this preview. SyNDROME
Microvascular angina Coronary artery spasm
Ischaemic heart disease a Labs: troponins/CK-MB =, evaluate lipid profile a Labs: troponins/CK-MB =
a ECG at rest and during exercise: normal, ST depression, a ECG/Holter monitoring:
Ischaemic heart disease T-wave inversion ST elevation and/or high
D Ischaemic heart disease is caused by reduced oxygenation of the heart. A a Echocardiography/stress echocardiography: normal or re- T waves and/or T-wave in-
gional hypokinesia and wall motion abnormalities version during symptoms,
distinction can be made between ischaemic heart disease (see Table 61) and
a Coronary CT: evaluation of coronary stenoses normal between episodes
acute coronary syndrome (see Table 63 and Figure 53). Dx a Perfusion scan: normal or zones of hypoperfusion in stress a Echocardiography: normal
scans
ISCHAEMIA WITH NON OCCLuSIVE
CHRONIC CORONARy CORONARy ARTERIES Coronary angiography: if Coronary angiography: no Coronary angiography: to rule
SyNDROME disease or therapy resistance/ significant coronary ste- out coronary stenoses, vaso-
Microvascular angina Coronary artery spasm
intolerance progresses noses spasms may be visualised
Crushing CP due to transient A type of angina pectoris A type of angina caused by
myocardial ischaemia. Typically with signs of cardiac ischae- coronary spasms. Also known Cardiovascular risk management Smoking cessation
induced by exercise and disap- mia in which the epicardi- as Prinzmetal angina.
D pears within minutes at rest. al coronary arteries appear Sublingual nitroglycerin (symptomatic)
normal. Formerly known as
cardiac syndrome X. Short-acting nitrate to relieve Beta blocker, calcium Calcium antagonist
episodes, maintenance med- antagonist, nicorandil
Prevalence age 45-64: 4-7%, in- Exact epidemiology un- Rare ication if >2 episodes/wk:
E
creasing with age known beta blocker or calcium anta-
gonist, possibly long-acting
Significant coronary stenosis I Exact aetiology unknown, Vasospasm of the coronary
nitrate, acetylsalicylic acid
insufficient O supply with in- suspected vasomotor dys- arteries I temporary high- Tx
Ae 2 Cardiac catheterisation if
creased cardiac demand for O function of the cardiac mi- grade coronary obstruction
2 symptoms persist despite
crovasculature
optimal pharmacological
treatment (OPT): PCI for sig-
General cardiovascular risk factors General cardiovascular risk
nificant stenosis (>70% or
factors, especially smoking,
R FFR <0.80) or coronary artery
drug use and coronary inter-
bypass graft (CABG) in triple
ventions
vessel disease, main corona-
a Crushing CP, may radiate CP at rest and during exer- a Chest pain, dyspnoea, ry artery stenosis and com-
to left shoulder/arm and/or cise vegetative symptoms bined valvular heart disease
throat/jaw (see Table 62 for a Typically occurs at rest,
Depends on underlying cause, comorbidities and cardiovas- a 5-year survival rate: 94%
classification) exercise tolerance is of-
Hx a Dyspnoea on exertion, nau- ten preserved cular risk profile a 25% of cases are compli-
sea , sweating a Very good response to P cated by myocardial in-
a Provoking factors: exercise, nitrates farction (MI) or ventricular
arrhythmias if not treated
emotion, stress, cold, food
Silent angina: myocardial is- N/A Association with migraine
PE Auscultation: normal , sometimes S3 or S4 Normal chaemia in the absence of and Raynaud’s phenomenon
!
symptoms. At-risk population:
Table 61A // Stable ischaemic heart disease
DM, hypertension.
For a detailed look at chest pain, see the section on Clinical reason- Table 61B // Stable ischaemic heart disease
ing.
02
snoitidnoC
12
snoitidnoC
--- Страница 12 ---
The typical male patient with ischaemic heart disease is >65 years Always consider adding a PPI to DAPT in order to prevent GI bleed-
of age, makes a restless impression and presents with crushing CP ing.
radiating to left jaw/shoulder. This pain disappears at rest in stable
ischaemic disease but persists in unstable ischaemic disease (acute
coronary syndrome). The presentation can differ in women. Crushing Angina pectoris (AP)
CP may not be the primary symptom. Atypical symptoms (e.g.
nausea, heartburn, neck and jaw pain) are more frequent in women.
Vasospastic angina
Stable AP pectoris Microvascular angina
Treadmill stress testing has a sensitivity and specificity of approxima-
tely 50%. The absence of ischaemic changes on the ECG does not
rule out ischaemic heart disease. In the presence of clinical symptoms,
additional diagnostics should be pursued. Plaque damage Non-occlusive
thrombus
Unstable
AP
NSTEMI
Atypical presentation of ischaemic heart disease and ACS is more
common in the elderly and diabetics. Non-specific symptoms such
as a general feeling of discomfort, abdominal pain and autonomic Acute coronary syndrome Occlusive
(ACS) thrombus
symptoms may be more pronounced than CP. Symptoms may also be
very limited or nonexistent. STEMI
Myocardial Troponin
infarction
1-14% of infarctions occur without coronary occlusion and are classi-
fied as MINOCA (myocardial infarction with nonocclusive coronary Figure 53 // Ischaemic heart disease
arteries). In many cases the aetiology is unknown, but MINOCA may
be secondary to coronary spasms, Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, micro-
vascular dysfunction or viral myocarditis. Initial treatment is linked to
the specific aetiology. If no aetiology is found, it should be treated as
a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
CLASS SEVERITy OF ANGINA PECTORIS
Posterior wall infarction Lateral wall infarction
0 No/asymptomatic angina pectoris
1 Angina pectoris with strenuous exertion
2 Angina pectoris with moderate exertion
3 Angina pectoris with mild exertion
Inferior wall infarction Anterior wall infarction
4 Angina pectoris at rest
Table 62 // Canadian Cardiovascular Society grading of angina pectoris Figure 54 // Patterns of infarction in a STEMI
22
snoitidnoC
32
snoitidnoC
--- Страница 13 ---
Heart failure
±17%, in stable patients: ±7%
! Risk of cardiogenic shock, progression of heart failure and sudden car-
Heart failure (HF) diac arrest
D HF, also called congestive heart failure, is a clinical syndrome caused by func-
tional or structural cardiac pathology that results in decreased CO and/or in-
creased intracardiac pressure. A distinction is made between chronic heart Pulmonary artery Aorta Cardiac output L
failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), with mildly reduced ejec-
Fatigue, dyspnoea, cold intolerance,
tion fraction (HFmrEF) and with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), and acute dizziness, syncope, exercise tolerance L
heart failure (see Table 80).
E Prevalence in adult population = 1-2%, prevalence at age ≥70 = 10%, preva-
lence at age ≥85 = 20%
Ae Systolic function L, diastolic function L Vena cava Hypertension
R General cardiovascular risk factors (see Table 80) Fluid overload RAS K
Hx See Table 80 and Figure 75
PE See Table 80 and Figure 75
Dx a Labs: NT-proBNP or other natriuretic peptides K
a ECG: possibly information about aetiology. Heart failure is unlikely with a Jugular vein Pulmonary veins
normal ECG.
disten Ct Vio Pn K,
Pulmonary hypertension/
a Chest X-ray to rule out pulmonary pathology: signs of acute heart failure fluid overload
Pleural fluid
a Echocardiography (gold standard): information about aetiology and car- Hepatomegaly
diac function Ascites
a Cardiac MRI/PET-CT/CTCA/cardiac catheterisation (if ultrasound is incon-
clusive): information about aetiology, atrial and ventricular pressure and Nycturia
cardiac function
Pulmonary oedema,
a Stress ultrasound or ECG (in follow-up phase): evaluation of exercise ca- crepitations,
orthopnoea
pacity
Tx a Treat underlying cause Peripheral
oedema
a Treatment is aimed at reducing symptoms, maintaining quality of life
and improving prognosis
a Smoking cessation (especially with underlying coronary artery disease), Figure 75 // Clinical symptoms of heart failure
exercise K, weight reduction, dietary changes (saturated fats/carbohy-
drates/salt/caffeine L, unsaturated fats K, fruit/vegetables K, fluid re- The severity of heart failure is determined using the New york Heart
striction), avoid alcohol consumption, avoid stress Association (NYHA) classification for heart failure:
See Table 80 a NYHA I: asymptomatic
P a Depending on underlying cause, comorbidities and overall condition of a NYHA II: dyspnoea during strenuous exercise
a NYHA III: dyspnoea during moderate exercise
patient
a NYHA IV: dyspnoea at rest or during mild exercise
a 1-year mortality after hospitalisation (largely independent of aetiology):
42
snoitidnoC
yranomluP noitalucric
noitalucric
cimetsyS
52
snoitidnoC
--- Страница 14 ---
Appendices
RHyTHM
In a sinus rhythm, each P wave must be followed by a QRS complex and each QRS complex must be pre-
ceded by a P wave. The P wave must also be sinusoidal, which means it must be biphasic in V1 and pos-
Appendix 1: Systematic ECG assessment
itive in II and aVF. The positive deflections in II and aVF are caused by the direction of atrial activation
(down from the sinus node, i.e. towards II and aVF). In an atrial rhythm, the atrium is activated from a fo-
PERSONAL DATA & TECHNICAL QuALITy cus other than the sinus node, which results in a different shape depending on the origin of the impulse.
Check personal data Sinus rhythm P wave is positive in I, II; biphasic in V1
0.04 sec Atrial flutter Sawtooth wave on baseline, often regular, 300/min with 2:1 AV block
Atrial fibrillation Irregular, no uniform P waves
Atrial rhythm Abnormal P wave before each QRS complex
Junctional/ventricular No P wave before each QRS complex
0.1 mV
escape rhythm
1 mV
Check calibration Table 82 // Rhythm
and paper speed
RATE
0.2 sec
Normal 60-100/min
Bradycardia <60/min
Tachycardia >100/min
Time Narrow complex tachycardia I always supraventricular
Check placement and orientation of ECG leads
Wide complex tachycardia I ventricular or supraventricular tachycardia with bundle
Negative complex in I with negative P wave. Most common cause of branch block (or aberrancy)
Left arm/right arm
right heart axis.
reversal Regular rate: count number of large squares between R waves: 300-150-100-75-60-50
Irregular rate: count number of QRS complexes in 30 large squares (6 sec) x 10
Lead I, II or III (depending on the reversal) measures the potential dif-
Neutral lead ference between the two legs. Because this difference is negligible, the Table 83 // Rates
lead will show a flatline, with the possible exception of some far-field
placed on arm
potential (i.e. electrical activity of the heart occurring far away from the
instead of leg lead, visualised as minuscule deflections on ECG). If the neutral lead is CONDuCTION TIMES
misplaced, almost all other leads will look abnormal too.
PQ interval 120-200 ms
Unexpected R-wave progression (e.g. increase - decrease - increase)
Chest lead reversals
First-degree AV block PQ >200 ms
Table 81 // Personal data and technical quality Second-degree type I/ Gradually increasing PQ interval until impulses from the atria are no
Wenckebach AV block longer conducted to the ventricles.
Incorrect placement of ECG leads can lead to inversion of limb leads
of microvoltages in the chest leads. Table 84A // Conduction times
62
//
seCidneppA
egatloV
72
//
seCidneppA
--- Страница 15 ---
About us
Our white-coat pockets
As medical students, we felt overwhelmed by the amount of medical knowledge One year later, both of us had started our clinical rotations. We recognized a com-
available. An overview was lacking. Fueled by this need for change, we embar- mon challenge faced by many peers: the need for quick and easy access to practical
ked on a journey that has now brought together over 500 students and doctors information. In response, we started creating our first series of pockets – concise yet
to create the entire Compendium Medicine book series. Our mission is to help comprehensive pocket-sized booklets designed to provide essential and practical in-
and connect healthcare professionals globally by providing accessible knowledge. formation during a shift.
A period of many milestones followed. Our team expanded every month: from au-
The bigger picture thors to medical specialists, from ambassadors to illustrators. With a growing number
of followers on social media, a real community was born. With this team, we worked
incredibly hard on new pockets as well as new additions like flashcards and pocket
In 2015, at VU University in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, our paths crossed as we
cards. As of now, we have launched a total of 18 different pockets!
were both pursuing our medical educations. The vast sea of medical knowledge over-
whelmed us, highlighting the need for a comprehensive overview. We were surprised
by the isolated efforts of every hospital and university, each working on its own ‘island’,
publishing individual books and reference works instead of fostering collaboration.
Motivated to make a difference, we envisioned a solution: a comprehensive guide en-
Compendium Medicine pockets
compassing all 35 subspecialties, enriched with figures, icons, charts, and mnemon-
ics. Our vision was clear – our books had to be visual, concise, and to the point. With
Expanding our mission globally
a dedicated team of students and doctors, we started writing an encyclopedia using
our unique method. Compendium Medicine was born!
With the experience gained over the
past years, we are committed to making
Book series a positive impact on medical students
and healthcare professionals worldwide.
Following almost two years of dedicated effort, the first edition achieved sold-out This new phase kicked off with the dis-
status even before its official launch: a remarkable start to the ongoing rollercoast- tribution of our Radiology pocket to all
er journey. The most rewarding aspect of this experience has been – and still is – the continents. We were amazed to have
overwhelmingly positive feedback from medical students and specialists. Our narra- reached readers from over 75 countries!
tive caught the attention of prominent Dutch and Belgian newspapers and journals, Their positive feedback was instrumen-
leading to invitations to feature on popular talk shows on national television. tal in propelling us forward, and we are
excited to present our second pocket in
English: Cardiology and Vascular Medi-
cine.. And this is just the beginning: we
are actively working on bringing more
pockets to you!
Compendium Medicine book series Doctors and founders of Compendium Medicine
82
//
su
tuobA
92
//
su
tuobA
--- Страница 16 ---
Scan this QR code for
Compendium The BasiCs more information.
Compass neCT
Pr
a
on C T
iC
C e
Compass
We believe that on your journey
from medical student to retirement
y
s
yto oeu
up
c aso
.
l
on
T
nt
h
gi en u
tC
ho
o
eu
m
s wl py
ae
yn
n
.a dv ii ug mat Ce ot mhe ps ae
s
sfi v ae
ss ists
DeeP
Dive
exPerienCe
3
E
L we
iX
ta
hrP
n
yE ooR
un
I o-E
t
nhN
e
th-C
g eo
E
w
b
a
ry
d
,c dar ur ry ii nn gg yo ou ur
r
sp ho ic ftk se at ns da n rod
u
np do sc ,k ae nt yc tia mrd es
.
Our first pockets are already available worldwide, with many
more to come. See below for details!
THE BASICS
1
Start at the foundation. Explore all 35 medical specialisms
through our comprehensive series, featuring clear diagrams,
tables, and illustrations. Visit our website for additional details.
PRACTICE
2
Reinforce your foundational knowledge
with our ‘Compendium Medicine’ app
and through our social media platforms!
DEEP DIVE
The app, which can be downloaded 4
Explore medical knowledge through extensive reading, im-
from the Apple and Android app stores,
mersing yourself in a variety of literature, guidelines, and the
enables you to practice questions on
latest scientific articles.
a daily basis and participate in the
monthly challenge.
CONNECT
5
Interested in connecting with individuals in your field? Be-
come a member of our community through our social media
platform – a network of students, physicians, specialists, and
other healthcare professionals.
03
//
ssApmoC
muidnepmoC
13
//
ssApmoC
muidnepmoC
--- Страница 17 ---
Do you want to receive the pocket
Cardiology and Vascular
Medicine as soon as possible?
Order the pocket here!
The pocket Cardiology and Vascular Medicine is a compact and practical handbook for every-
one in healthcare. It covers the fundamentals before delving into cardiology-specific diagnos-
tics and conditions.
We used our Compendium Method© to write this pocket. The method consists of comprehen-
sible illustrations for every medical condition, straightforward tables, icons, and useful mne-
monics. This method is designed to be visual, to the point and concise, all while maintaining
the highest quality standards through rigorous supervision by medical specialists.
Do you want to know more about our journey?
Explore our website and connect with us on social media to learn more.
Curious about the other pockets of Compendium Medicine?
Click here.
