=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Action potential - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:20.101736",
  "file_size_bytes": 1196906,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Action potential - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Action potential
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S.,
M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmai
l.com)
A. A schematic view of an idealized action potential
illustrates its various phases as the action potential
passes a point on a cell membrane. B. Actual recordings
of action potentials are often distorted compared to the
schematic view because of variations in
electrophysiological techniques used to make the
recording
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 1/14
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Contents
• Overview
• Underlying mechanism
• Resting potential
• Phases
• Resting potential
• Stimulation
• Depolarization ("Rising phase")
• Peak
• Repolarization ("Falling phase")
• Hyperpolarization ("Undershoot")
• Refractory Period
• Threshold and initiation
• Circuit model
• Propagation
• Speed of propagation
• Saltatory conduction
• Detailed mechanism
• Resilience to injury
• Role in disease
• Refractory period
• Termination and consequences
• Evolutionary advantage
• Plant action potentials
• Alternative models
• See also
• References
• General sources
• Primary sources
• Specific citations
• External links
Overview
An action potential is a "spike" of electrical discharge that travels along the membrane of a cell.
Action potentials are an essential feature of animal life, rapidly carrying information within and
between tissues. They also occur in some plants. Action potentials can be created by many types of
cells, but are used most extensively by the nervous system for communication between neurons
and for transmitting information from neurons to other body tissues such as muscles and glands.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 2/14
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Action potentials are not the same in all cell types and can even vary in their properties at different
locations in the same cell. For example, cardiac action potentials are significantly different from
the action potentials in most neurons. This article is primarily concerned with the "typical" action
potential of axons.
There is always a difference in electrostatic potential between the inside and outside of a cell, i.e.
the cell is polarized. This membrane potential is the result of the distribution of ions across the cell
membrane and the permeability of the membrane to these ions. The voltage of an inactive cell
remains close to a resting potential with excess negative charge inside the cell. When the
membrane of an excitable cell becomes depolarized beyond a threshold, the cell undergoes an
action potential (it "fires"), often called a "spike" (see Threshold and initiation).
An action potential is a rapid change of the polarity of the voltage from negative to positive and
then vice versa, the entire cycle lasting on the order of milliseconds. Each cycle — and therefore
each action potential — has a rising phase, a falling phase, and finally an undershoot (see Phases).
In specialized muscle cells of the heart, such as cardiac pacemaker cells, a plateau phase of
intermediate voltage may precede the falling phase, extending the action potential duration into
hundreds of milliseconds.
Action potentials are measured with the recording techniques of electrophysiology and more
recently with neurochips containing EOSFETs. An oscilloscope recording the membrane potential
from a single point on an axon shows each stage of the action potential as the wave passes. These
phases trace an arc that resembles a distorted sine wave; its amplitude depends on whether the
action potential wave has reached that point on the membrane or has passed it and if so, how long
ago.
The action potential does not dwell in one location of the cell's membrane, but travels along the
membrane (see Propagation). It can travel along an axon for long distances, for example to carry
signals from the spinal cord to the muscles of the foot. In large animals, such as giraffes and
whales, the distance traveled can be many meters. After traveling the whole length of the axon, the
action potential reaches a synapse, where it stimulates the release of neurotransmitters. These
neurotransmitters can immediately induce an action potential in the next neuron to propagate the
signal, but the response is usually more complex.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 3/14
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Both the speed and complexity of action potentials vary between different types of cells, but their
amplitudes tend to be roughly the same. Within any one cell, consecutive action potentials are
typically indistinguishable. Neurons are thought to transmit information by generating sequences
of action potentials called "spike trains". By varying both the rate as well as the precise timing of
the action potentials they generate, neurons can change the information that they transmit.
Underlying mechanism
The hydrophobic cell membrane prevents
charged molecules from easily diffusing through
it, permitting a potential difference to exist across
the membrane.
Resting potential
Main article: Resting potential
The resting potential is what would be maintained were there no action potentials, synaptic
potentials, or other changes to the membrane potential. In neurons the resting potential is
approximately -70 mV (the negative sign signifies excess negative charge inside the cell relative to
the outside). The resting potential is mostly determined by the ion concentrations in the fluids on
both sides of the cell membrane and the ion transport proteins in the cell membrane. The term
resting is somewhat misleading, for the cell must constantly do work to maintain the resting
potential.It takes cell more energy to maintain the resting potential as compared to transmission of
nerve impulses. The establishment of this potential difference involves several factors, the most
important of which are the transport of ions across the cell membrane and the selective
permeability of the membrane to these ions.
The active transport of potassium and sodium ions into and out of the cell, respectively, is
accomplished by a number of sodium-potassium pumps scattered across the cell membrane. Each
pump transports two ions of potassium into the cell for every three ions of sodium pumped out.
This establishes a particular distribution of positively charged ions across the cell membrane, with
more sodium present outside the cell than inside, and more potassium inside the cell than outside.
In some situations, the electrogenic sodium-potassium pumps make a significant contribution to
the resting membrane potential, but in most cells there are potassium leak channels that dominate
the value of the resting potential.
Sodium and potassium ions diffuse through open ion channels under the influence of their
electrochemical gradients. At the resting potential, the net movement of sodium into the cell equals
the net movement of potassium out of the cell. However, the resting cell membrane is
approximately 75 times more permeable to potassium than to sodium because potassium leak
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 4/14
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
channels are always open. As a result, the cell's resting membrane potential is closer to the
equilibrium potential of potassium (=E =−80 mV) than the equilibrium potential of sodium
K
(=E =+60 mV).
Na
Like the resting potential, action potentials depend upon the permeability of the cell membrane to
sodium and potassium ions. Transient changes in conductance for different ions cause the changes
in membrane potential necessary to initiate, sustain, and terminate action potentials.
Phases
The sequence of events that underlie the action potential are outlined below:
Resting potential
At resting potential some potassium leak channels are open but the voltage-gated sodium channels
are closed. Even though no net current flows, potassium, the major ion species, moves across the
membrane, thus pulling the resting potential close to the K+ equilibrium potential.
Stimulation
A local membrane depolarization caused by an excitatory stimulus causes some voltage-gated
sodium channels in the neuron cell surface membrane to open, allowing sodium ions to diffuse in
through the channels along their electrochemical gradient. Because they are positively charged,
they begin a reversal in the potential difference across the membrane from a positive-outside to a
negative-inside. Initially, the inward movement of sodium ions is also favored by the negative-
inside membrane potential. Overall the ions are under the influence of the driving force, the
difference between the membrane potential and the equilibrium potential of sodium.
Depolarization ("Rising phase")
As sodium ions enter and the membrane potential becomes less negative, more sodium channels
open, causing an even greater influx of sodium ions. This is an example of positive feedback. As
more sodium channels open, the sodium current dominates over the potassium leak current and
the membrane potential becomes positive inside. Recent experiments on cortical neurons suggest
that sodium channels open cooperatively,[1] allowing for a much faster uptake than is possible for
Hodgkin-Huxley–type dynamics.
Peak
By the time the membrane potential has reached a peak value of around +40 mV, time-dependent
inactivation gates on the sodium channels have already started to close, reducing and finally
preventing further influx of sodium ions. While this occurs, the voltage-sensitive activation gates
on the voltage-gated potassium channels begin to open.
Repolarization ("Falling phase")
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 5/14
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
As voltage-gated potassium channels open, there is a large outward movement of potassium ions
driven by the potassium concentration gradient and initially favored by the positive-inside
electrical gradient. As potassium ions diffuse out, this movement of positive charge causes a
reversal of the membrane potential to negative-inside and repolarization of the neuron back
towards the large negative-inside resting potential.
Hyperpolarization ("Undershoot")
Closing of voltage-gated potassium channels is both voltage- and time-dependent. As potassium
exits the cell, the resulting membrane repolarization initiates the closing of voltage-gated
potassium channels. These channels do not close immediately in response to a change in
membrane potential; rather, voltage-gated potassium channels (also called delayed rectifier
potassium channels) have a delayed response, such that potassium continues to flow out of the cell
even after the membrane has fully repolarized. Thus the membrane potential dips below the
normal resting membrane potential of the cell for a brief moment; this dip of hyperpolarization is
known as the undershoot.
Refractory Period
During the next ~ 1 msec, the Na+ and K+ Channels cannot be opened by a stimulus. The Na+/K+
Pump actively pumps Na+ out of the neuron and K+ into the neuron. This reestablishes the initial
ion distribution of the resting neuron (the voltage returns to the resting potential due to leak
currents, however, not due to the pump's action). The refractory period is important because it
ensures unidirectional (one way) propagation of the action potential.
Threshold and initiation
Action potentials are triggered when an initial depolarization reaches the threshold. This threshold
potential varies, but generally is about 15 millivolts more positive than the cell's resting membrane
potential, occurring when the inward sodium current exceeds the outward potassium current. The
net influx of positive charges carried by sodium ions depolarizes the membrane potential, leading
to the further opening of voltage-gated sodium channels. These channels support greater inward
current causing further depolarization, creating a positive-feedback cycle that drives the
membrane potential to a very depolarized level.
The action potential threshold can be shifted by changing the balance between sodium and
potassium currents. For example, if some of the sodium channels are in an inactivated state, then a
given level of depolarization will open fewer sodium channels and a greater depolarization will be
needed to trigger an action potential. This is the basis for the refractory period (see Refractory
period).
Action potentials are largely dictated by the interplay between sodium and potassium ions
(although there are minor contributions from other ions such as calcium and chloride), and are
often modeled using hypothetical cells containing only two transmembrane ion channels (a
voltage-gated sodium channel and a non-voltage-gated potassium channel). The origin of the
action potential threshold may be studied using I/V curves (right) that plot currents through ion
channels against the cell's membrane potential. (Note that the illustrated I/V is an "instantaneous"
current voltage relationship. It represents the peak current through channels at a given voltage
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 6/14
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
before any inactivation has taken place (i.e. ~ 1 ms after stepping to that voltage) for the Na
current. The most positive voltages in this plot are only attainable by the cell through artificial
means - i.e. voltages imposed by the voltage-clamp apparatus).
A plot of current (ion flux) against voltage
(transmembrane potential) illustrates the action
potential threshold (red arrow) of an idealized cell.
Four significant points in the I/V curve are indicated by arrows in the figure:
1. • The green arrow indicates the resting potential of the cell and also the value of the equilibrium
potential for potassium (E ). As the K+ channel is the only one open at these negative voltages,
k
the cell will rest at E .
k
2. • The yellow arrow indicates the equilibrium potential for Na+ (E ). In this two-ion system, E
Na Na
is the natural limit of membrane potential beyond which a cell cannot pass. Current values
illustrated in this graph that exceed E are measured by artificially pushing the cell's voltage
Na
past its natural limit. Note however, that E could only be reached if the potassium current were
Na
absent.
3. • The blue arrow indicates the maximum voltage that the peak of the action potential can
approach. This is the actual natural maximum membrane potential that this cell can reach. It
cannot reach E because of the counteracting influence of the potassium current.
Na
4. • The red arrow indicates the action potential threshold. This is where I becomes net-inward.
sum
Note that this is a zero-current crossing, but with a negative slope. Any such "negative slope
crossing" of the zero current level in an I/V plot is an unstable point. At any voltage negative to
this crossing, the current is outward and so a cell will tend to return to its resting potential. At any
voltage positive of this crossing, the current is inward and will tend to depolarize the cell. This
depolarization leads to more inward current, thus the sodium current become regenerative. The
point at which the green line reaches its most negative value is the point where all sodium
channels are open. Depolarizations beyond that point thus decrease the sodium current as the
driving force decreases as the membrane potential approaches E .
Na
The action potential threshold is often confused with the "threshold" of sodium channel opening.
This is incorrect, because sodium channels have no threshold. Instead, they open in response to
depolarization in a stochastic manner. Depolarization does not so much open the channel as
increases the probability of it being open. Even at hyperpolarized potentials, a sodium channel will
open very occasionally. In addition, the threshold of an action potential is not the voltage at which
sodium current becomes significant; it is the point where it exceeds the potassium current.
Biologically in neurons, depolarization typically originates in the dendrites at synapses. In
principle, however, an action potential may be initiated anywhere along a nerve fiber. In his
discovery of "Caonoikmiesa hle elpl eusc dtreliicvietry o,u"r Lseurviigceis G. Bay luvsainng io umr saedrveic eas ,l yeogu aogfr eae tdo eoaurd u sfer oofg c okoikcieks .as in life by touching
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 7/14
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
a sciatic nerve with his scalpel, to which he had inadvertently transferred a negative, static-electric
charge, thus initiating an action potential.
Circuit model
Cell membranes that contain ion channels can be modeled as RC circuits to better understand the
propagation of action potentials in biological membranes. In such a circuit, the resistor represents
the membrane's ion channels, while the capacitor models the insulating lipid membrane. Variable
resistors are used for voltage-gated ion channels, as their resistance changes with voltage. A fixed
resistor represents the potassium leak channels that maintain the membrane's resting potential.
The sodium and potassium gradients across the membrane are modeled as voltage sources
(batteries).
A. A basic RC circuit superimposed on an image
of a membrane bilayer shows the relationship
between the two. B. More elaborate circuits can
be used to model membranes containing ion
channels, such as this one containing at channels
for sodium (blue) and potassium (green).
Propagation
In unmyelinated axons, action potentials propagate as an interaction between passively spreading
membrane depolarization and voltage-gated sodium channels. When one patch of cell membrane
is depolarized enough to open its voltage-gated sodium channels, sodium ions enter the cell by
facilitated diffusion. Once inside, positively-charged sodium ions "nudge" adjacent ions down the
axon by electrostatic repulsion (analogous to the principle behind Newton's cradle) and attract
negative ions away from the adjacent membrane. As a result, a wave of positivity moves down the
axon without any individual ion moving very far. Once the adjacent patch of membrane is
depolarized, the voltage-gated sodium channels in that patch open, regenerating the cycle. The
process repeats itself down the length of the axon, with an action potential regenerated at each
segment of membrane.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 8/14
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Propagating action potentials can be modeled by
joining several RC circuits, each one representing
a patch of membrane.
Speed of propagation
See also: Time constant and Length constant
Action potentials propagate faster in axons of larger diameter, other things being equal. They
typically travel from 10 – 100 m/s. The main reason is that the axial resistance of the axon lumen is
lower with larger diameters, because of an increase in the ratio of cross-sectional area to
membrane surface area. As the membrane surface area is the chief factor impeding action potential
propagation in an unmyelinated axon, increasing this ratio is a particularly effective way of
increasing conduction speed.
An extreme example of an animal using axon diameter to speed action potential conduction is
found in the Atlantic squid. The squid giant axon controls the muscle contraction associated with
the squid's predator escape response. This axon can be more than 1 mm in diameter, and is
presumably an adaptation to allow very fast activation of the escape behavior. The velocity of nerve
impulses in these fibers is among the fastest in nature. Squids are notable examples of organisms
with unmyelinated axons; the first tests to try to determine the mechanism by which impulses
travel along axons, involving the detection of a potential difference between the inside and the
surface of a neuron, were undertaken in the 1940s by Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley using
squid giant axons because of their relatively large axon diameter. Hodgkin and Huxley won their
shares of the 1963 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their work on the electrophysiology of
nerve action potentials.
In the autonomic nervous system in mammals, postganglionic neurons are unmyelinated. The
small diameter of these axons (about 2 µ) results in a propagatory speed of approximately 1 m/s, as
opposed to approximately 18 m/s in myelinated nerve fibers of comparable diameter, thus
highlighting the effect of myelination on the speed of transmission of impulses.
Saltatory conduction
In myelinated axons, saltatory conduction is the process by which an action potential appears to
jump along the length of an axon, being regenerated only at uninsulated segments (the nodes of
Ranvier). Saltatory conduction increases nerve conduction velocity without having to dramatically
increase axon diameter.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 9/14
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Saltatory conduction has played an important role in the evolution of larger and more complex
organisms whose nervous systems must rapidly transmit action potentials across greater distances.
Without saltatory conduction, conduction velocity would need large increases in axon diameter,
resulting in organisms with nervous systems too large for their bodies.
Detailed mechanism
The main impediment to conduction speed in unmyelinated axons is membrane capacitance. In an
electric circuit, the capacitance of a capacitor can be decreased by decreasing the cross-sectional
area of its plates, or by increasing the distance between plates. The nervous system uses myelin as
its main strategy to decrease membrane capacitance. Myelin is an insulating sheath wrapped
around axons by Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes, neuroglia that flatten their cytoplasm to
form large sheets made up mostly of plasma membrane. These sheets wrap around the axon,
moving the conducting plates (the intra- and extracellular fluid) farther apart to decrease
membrane capacitance.
The resulting insulation allows the rapid (essentially instantaneous) conduction of ions through a
myelinated segment of axon, but prevents the regeneration of action potentials through those
segments. Action potentials are only regenerated at the unmyelinated nodes of Ranvier which are
spaced intermittently between myelinated segments. An abundance of voltage-gated sodium
channels on these bare segments (up to four orders of magnitude greater than their density in
unmyelinated axons[2]) allows action potentials to be efficiently regenerated at the nodes of
Ranvier.
As a result of myelination, the insulated portion of the axon behaves like a passive wire: it conducts
action potentials rapidly because its membrane capacitance is low, and minimizes the degradation
of action potentials because its membrane resistance is high. When this passively propagated
signal reaches a node of Ranvier, it initiates an action potential, which subsequently travels
passively to the next node where the cycle repeats.
Resilience to injury
The length of myelinated segments of axon is important to saltatory conduction. They should be as
long as possible to maximize the length of fast passive conduction, but not so long that the decay of
the passive signal is too great to reach threshold at the next node of Ranvier. In reality, myelinated
segments are long enough for the passively propagated signal to travel for at least two nodes while
retaining enough amplitude to fire an action potential at the second or third node. Thus, the safety
factor of saltatory conduction is high, allowing transmission to bypass nodes in case of injury.
Role in disease
Some diseases degrade saltatory conduction and reduce the speed of action potential conductance.
The most well-known of these diseases is multiple sclerosis, in which the breakdown of myelin
impairs coordinated movement.
Refractory period
Where membrane has undergone an action potential, a refractory period follows. Thus, although
the passive transmission of action potentials across myelinated segments would suggest that action
potentials propagate in either direction, most action potentials travel unidirectionally because the
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
node behind the propagating action potential is refractory.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 10/14
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
This period arises primarily because of the time-dependent inactivation of sodium channels, as
described by Hodgkin and Huxley in 1952. Immediately after an action potential, during the
absolute refractory period, virtually all sodium channels are inactivated and thus it is impossible
to fire another action potential in that segment of membrane.
With time, sodium channels are reactivated in a stochastic manner. As they become available, it
becomes possible to fire an action potential, albeit one with a much higher threshold. This is the
relative refractory period and together with the absolute refractory period, lasts approximately
five milliseconds.
Termination and consequences
An action potential proceeding along a membrane is prevented from reversing its direction by the
refractory period, and will eventually depolarize the entire cell. When the action potential reaches
an area where all the cell membrane is already depolarized or still in the refractory period, the
action potential can no longer propagate. Because an action potential propagates only along
contiguous membrane, another mechanism is necessary to transmit action potentials between
cells. Neurons communicate with each other at a chemical synapse. Other cell types, such as
cardiac muscle cells, can communicate action potentials via electrical synapses.
The synapse is a very small gap between neurons that allows one-way communication. As the
presynaptic neuron undergoes an action potential, voltage-sensitive calcium channels open and
cause the release of neurotransmitters into the synapse. These chemical transmitters can initiate
an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron, allowing communication between neurons. Some
neurotransmitters inhibit action potentials, and the interaction of excitatory and inhibitory signals
allows complex modulation of signals in the nervous system.
Evolutionary advantage
The action potential, as a method of long-distance communication, fits a particular biological need
seen most readily when considering the transmission of information along a nerve axon. To move a
signal from one end of an axon to the other, nature must contend with physics similar to those that
govern the movement of electrical signals along a wire. Due to the resistance and capacitance of a
wire, signals tend to degrade as they travel along that wire over a distance. These properties,
known collectively as cable properties set the physical limits over which signals can travel. Thus,
nonspiking neurons (which carry signals without action potentials) tend to be small. Proper
function of the body requires that signals be delivered from one end of an axon to the other without
loss. An action potential does not so much propagate along an axon, as it is newly regenerated by
the membrane voltage and current at each stretch of membrane along its path. In other words, the
nerve membrane recreates the action potential at its full amplitude as it travels down the axon,
thus overcoming the limitations imposed by cable physics.
Plant action potentials
Many plants also exhibit action potentials that travel via their phloem to coordinate activity. The
main difference between plant and animal action potentials is that plants primarily use potassium
and calcium currents while animals typically use currents of potassium and sodium.
Alternative models
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 11/14
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
The model of electrical signal propagation in neurons employing voltage-gated ion channels
described above is accepted by almost all scientists working in the field. However there are a few
observations not easily reconciled with the model:
• A signal traveling along a neuron is accompanied by a slight local thickening of the membrane
and a force acting outwards.[3]
• An action potential traveling along a neuron results in a slight increase in temperature followed
by a decrease in temperature;[4] electrical charges traveling through a resistor however always
produce heat.
One recent alternative, the soliton model, attempts to explain signals in neurons as pressure (or
sound) solitons traveling along the membrane, accompanied by electrical field changes resulting
from piezo-electric effects.
See also
• Cardiac action potential
• Ventricular action potential
• Membrane potential
• Depolarization
• Hyperpolarization
• Signals (biology)
• Time constant
• Length constant
• Bursting
References
General sources
• Bear, M.F., B.W. Connors, and M.A. Paradiso. 2001. Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain.
Baltimore: Lippincott. ISBN 0781739446
• Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM. Principles of Neural Science, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York (2000). ISBN 0-8385-7701-6
• Dale Purves, et al. Neuroscience, 2nd ed. 2001. Sinauer Associates, Inc. Ion Channels
Underlying Action Potentials. ISBN 0878937250 Release of Transmitters from Synaptic Vesicles
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid=neurosci.section.326)
• Kent, M., Advanced Biology. 2000. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
• Taylor, D.J., Green, N.P.O., & Stout, G.W. 2003. Biological Sciences, 3rd ed. United Kingdom :
Cambridge University Press.
Primary sources
• Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. Currents carried by sodium and potassium ions through the membrane
of the giant axon of Loligo. J Physiol. 1952 Apr;116(4):449-72. PMID 14946713
• Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. The components of membrane conductance in the giant axon of
Loligo. J Physiol. 1952 Apr;116(4):473-96. PMID 14946714
• Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. The dual effect of membrane potential on sodium conductance in the
giant axon of Loligo. J Physiol. 1952 Apr;116(4):497 – 506. PMID 14946715
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 12/14
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
• Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to
conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol. 1952 Aug;117(4):500-44. PMID 12991237
• Clay JR. Axonal excitability revisited. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2005 May;88(1):59 – 90. PMID
15561301
Specific citations
External links
• Template:McGrawHillAnimation
• Electrochemistry of plant life (http://electrochem.cwru.edu/ed/encycl/art-p01-plants.htm), May,
2004 from Case Western Reserve University
• Demonstration of ion flow during action potential (http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/matthew
s/channel.html) at Blackwell Publishing
• Action potential propagation in myelinated vs. unmyelinated axons (http://www.blackwellpublish
ing.com/matthews/actionp.html) at Blackwell Publishing
• Open-source software to simulate neuronal and cardiac action potentials (http://cese.sourcefor
ge.net/) at SourceForge
• Nernst/Goldman Equation Simulator (http://www.nernstgoldman.physiology.arizona.edu/) at
University of Arizona
• Electrophysiology and The Molecular Basis of Excitability (http://nerve.bsd.uchicago.edu/) at
University of Chicago
• Action Potential (http://www.unm.edu/~lkravitz/Exercise%20Phys/actionpotential.html) Len
Kravitz, University of New Mexico
• PSY 340 Brain and Behavior, 2.2a Neural Impulse (part 2) (http://web.lemoyne.edu/~hevern/ps
y340/lectures/psy340.02.2a.neur.impulse.html) Vincent W. Hevern, Le Moyne College, Syracuse
New York
• Action Potentials (http://faculty.stcc.edu/AandP/AP/AP1pages/nervssys/unit11/action.htm)
Dawn A. Tamarkin, Springfield Technical Community College, Springfield, Massechusets
• Action Potential (http://gargoyle.arcadia.edu/psychology/blustein/neuro/Lecture_Notes/Week_
1/Week_2/Action_Potential.jpg) Rachel McCready, Intensive Care Unit, London Health Services
Centre
• Propagation of an Action Potential (http://www.accessexcellence.org/RC/VL/GG/ecb/propagati
on_action_potential.html) National Health Museum Resource Center, Washington DC
• Neurotransmission (http://ibs.derby.ac.uk/~steve/neuroscience/) Steve Croker, University of
Derby. Derby, England
• Neurotransmitter and neuron diagrams (http://mywebpages.comcast.net/epollak/PSY255_pix/
PSY255_pix.htm) Edward I. Pollack, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
• Action Potential Conduction (http://concise.britannica.com/ebc/art-66781) Encyclopædia
Britannica
• The Action Potential (http://www.du.edu/~kinnamon/3640/actionpotential/ap1.html) John
Kinnamon, University of Denver
• Excitable Cells (http://home.comcast.net/~john.kimball1/BiologyPages/E/ExcitableCells.html)
John Kimball, Tufts University (retired)
• Resting and Action Membrane Potentials (http://trc.ucdavis.edu/biosci10v/bis10v/week10/06po
tential.html) Teaching Resources Center, UC Davis. Animated tutorials
• Action Potential (http://mcb.berkeley.edu/courses/mcb64/action_potential.html) Frank Werblin,
UC Berkely. Animated and interactive tutorials
• Action Potential Movement Through an Axon (http://learner2.learner.org/channel/courses/biolo
gy/archive/images/1968_d.html) at learner.org
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 13/14
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 16:08 Action potential - wikidoc
Template:Link FA ar:لعفلا نومك de:Aktionspotential ko:활동전위 it:Potenziale d'azione he:יבצע ףחד
ms:Potensi aksi nl:Actiepotentiaal simple:Nerve impulse sl:Akcijski potencial
fi:Toimintapotentiaali sv:Aktionspotential
Template:Jb1
Template:WikiDoc Sources
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Action_potential 14/14
