=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:53.884591",
  "file_size_bytes": 412621,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Aortic Regurgitation
(Aortic Insufficiency)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Aortic regurgitation (AR) is incomplete closure of the aortic valve, causing
backflow from the aorta into the left ventricle during diastole. Causes include
valvular degeneration, aortic root dilation, or both, related to underlying
bicuspid aortic valve, aortic root dissection, rheumatic fever, endocarditis,
myxomatous degeneration, and connective tissue (eg, Marfan syndrome) or
rheumatologic diseases. Symptoms include exertional dyspnea, orthopnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, palpitations, and chest pain. Signs include
widened pulse pressure and an early diastolic murmur. Diagnosis is by physical
examination and echocardiography. Treatment is surgical aortic valve
replacement or repair.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Etiology of Aortic Regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation, also called aortic insufficiency, may be acute (very uncommonly) or chronic.
The primary causes of acute aortic regurgitation, are:
Dissection of the ascending aorta
Infective endocarditis
The primary causes of chronic aortic regurgitation in adults are:
Degeneration of the aortic valve and root (with or without a bicuspid valve)
Infective endocarditis
Myxomatous degeneration
Rheumatic fever
Thoracic aortic aneurysm
Trauma
 1/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Common causes of chronic aortic regurgitation in children are:
Ventricular septal defect with aortic valve prolapse
Bicuspid aortic valve
Aortic regurgitation due to myxomatous degeneration may develop in patients with Marfan syndrome
or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Rarely, aortic regurgitation is caused by seronegative spondyloarthropathies (eg, ankylosing spondylitis,
reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis), rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, arthritis
associated with ulcerative colitis, luetic (syphilitic) aortitis, osteogenesis imperfecta, supravalvular or
discrete membranous subaortic stenosis, Takayasu arteritis, rupture of a sinus of Valsalva, acromegaly,
and giant cell arteritis.
Pathophysiology of Aortic Regurgitation
In aortic regurgitation, volume overload of the left ventricle (LV) occurs because during diastole the LV
receives blood regurgitated from the aorta in addition to blood from the left atrium.
In acute aortic regurgitation, the LV does not have time to dilate to accommodate the increased
volume, which can then cause a rapid increase in left ventricular pressure and, subsequently,
pulmonary edema and decreased cardiac output.
In chronic aortic regurgitation, LV hypertrophy and dilation can occur gradually, so normal left
ventricular pressures and cardiac output are maintained. But decompensation eventually develops,
ultimately causing arrhythmias, LV dysfunction, and heart failure (HF).
Symptoms and Signs of Aortic Regurgitation
Acute aortic regurgitation can cause symptoms of heart failure (dyspnea, fatigue, weakness, edema) and
cardiogenic shock (hypotension with resultant multisystem organ damage).
Chronic aortic regurgitation is typically asymptomatic for years; progressive exertional dyspnea,
orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and palpitations develop insidiously.
Symptoms of heart failure correlate poorly with objective measures of left ventricular function. Chest
pain (angina pectoris) affects relatively few patients who do not have coexisting coronary artery disease
(CAD) and, when it occurs, is especially common at night. Patients may present with endocarditis (eg,
fever, anemia, weight loss, embolic phenomena) because the abnormal aortic valve is predisposed to
bacterial seeding.
Signs vary by severity and acuity. Signs in acute aortic regurgitation reflect heart failure and cardiogenic
shock and typically include tachycardia, cool extremities, lung crackles, and low blood pressure. The first
heart sound (S1) is usually absent (because aortic and LV diastolic pressures equalize), and a third heart
sound (S3) is common.
 2/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
As chronic disease progresses, systolic blood pressure increases while diastolic blood pressure
decreases, creating a widened pulse pressure. With time, the LV impulse may become enlarged,
increased in amplitude, and displaced downward and laterally, with systolic depression of the entire left
parasternal area, giving a rocking motion to the left chest.
The typical heart murmur of aortic regurgitation is a blowing, high-pitched, diastolic decrescendo
murmur beginning soon after the first heart sound. It is generally louder in chronic AR, and may be soft
or absent in acute AR even if severe. However, a mid-to-late diastolic rumble heard at the apex (Austin
Flint murmur) may result from rapid regurgitant flow into the LV, causing mitral valve leaflet vibration at
the peak of atrial flow.
AUDIO
Aortic Regurgitation
AUDIO
Austin Flint Murmur
A systolic apical or carotid thrill may become palpable in later stages of AR; it is caused by large forward
stroke volumes and low aortic diastolic pressure.
Additional auscultatory findings may include a normal S1 and a nonsplit, loud, sharp or slapping
second heart sound (S2) caused by increased elastic aortic recoil. The murmur of AR is often
unimpressive, beginning soon after the aortic component of S2 (A2); it is loudest at the third or fourth
left parasternal intercostal space or at the apex. The murmur is heard best with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope when the patient is leaning forward, with breath held at end-expiration. It increases in
volume in response to maneuvers that increase afterload (eg, squatting, isometric handgrip). If AR is
slight, the murmur may occur only in early diastole. If LV diastolic pressure is very high, the murmur is
short because aortic and LV diastolic pressures equalize earlier in diastole.
Other abnormal sounds include a forward ejection and backward regurgitant flow (to-and-fro) murmur,
an ejection click soon after the S1, and an aortic ejection flow murmur. A diastolic murmur heard near
the axilla or mid left thorax (Cole-Cecil murmur) is caused by fusion of the aortic murmur with the S3,
which is due to simultaneous filling of LV from the left atrium and AR. An Austin Flint murmur may
mimic the diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis.
Visible signs include:
Head bobbing (de Musset sign)
Pulsation of the fingernail capillaries (Quincke sign, best seen while applying slight pressure)
Pulsation of the uvula (Müller sign)
Palpable signs include:
 3/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Large-volume pulse with rapid rise and fall (slapping, water-hammer, or collapsing pulse)
Pulsation of the carotid arteries (Corrigan sign)
Pulsation of the retinal arteries (Becker sign)
Pulsation of the liver (Rosenbach sign)
Pulsation of the spleen (Gerhard sign)
Blood pressure findings may include:
Popliteal systolic pressure ≥ 60 mm Hg higher than brachial pressure (Hill sign)
A fall in diastolic blood pressure of > 15 mm Hg with arm elevation (Mayne sign)
Auscultatory signs include a:
Sharp sound heard over the femoral pulse (pistol-shot sound, or Traube sign)
Femoral systolic bruit distal and a diastolic bruit proximal to arterial compression (Duroziez
sign)
Diagnosis of Aortic Regurgitation
Echocardiography
Diagnosis of aortic regurgitation is suspected based on history and physical examination findings and
confirmed by echocardiography. Doppler echocardiography is the test of choice to detect and quantify
the magnitude of regurgitant blood flow and grade overall severity of the AR. Two-dimensional
echocardiography can quantify aortic root size and anatomy and LV function. Both two-dimensional and
three-dimensional echocardiography can be used to evaluate leaflet morphology.
Severe chronic aortic regurgitation is suggested by any of the following:
Color Doppler jet width ≥ 65% of the LV outflow tract diameter
Holodiastolic flow reversal in the abdominal aorta (specific for severe AR)
Regurgitant volume ≥ 60 mL/beat
Regurgitation fraction ≥ 50%
Vena contracta > 6 mm (the narrowest diameter of the fluid stream downstream of the
abnormal valve orifice)
Echocardiography can also assess severity of pulmonary hypertension secondary to LV failure, detect
vegetations or pericardial effusions (eg, in aortic dissection), and provide information about prognosis.
Coarctation is associated with bicuspid valve and is detected echocardiography by placing the
ultrasound transducer at the suprasternal notch, as well as evaluating the Doppler pattern in the
abdominal aorta. Transesophageal echocardiography and three-dimensional echocardiography provide
additional delineation of aortic dilatation and valve anatomy, which is especially useful when surgical
repair is being considered. If the aorta is enlarged, gated computed tomography (CT) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is recommended to evaluate the entire thoracic aorta. MRI also can help
assess LV function and degree of AR when echocardiographic images are suboptimal.
 4/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
ECG and chest radiograph should also be performed.
ECG may show repolarization abnormalities with or without QRS voltage criteria of LV hypertrophy, left
atrial enlargement, and T-wave inversion with ST-segment depression in precordial leads.
Chest radiograph may show cardiomegaly and a prominent aortic root in patients with chronic
progressive AR. If AR is severe, signs of pulmonary edema and HF may also be present. Exercise testing
may help assess functional capacity and symptoms in patients with documented AR and equivocal
symptoms.
Coronary angiography should be performed before surgery, even if no angina is present because
approximately 20% of patients with severe AR have significant coronary artery disease (1), which may
need concomitant coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
First-degree relatives of patients with a bicuspid valve should be screened using echocardiography
because up to 15% will be similarly affected (2).
 5/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Phonocardiographic Characteristics of Heart Murmurs
Diagnosis references
1. Graboys TB, Cohn PF. The prevalence of angina pectoris and abnormal coronary arteriograms in
severe aortic valvular disease. Am Heart J 1977;93(6):683-686. doi:10.1016/s0002-8703(77)80062-8
2. Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The American Association for Thoracic Surgery
consensus guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopathy: Full online-only version. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2018;156(2):e41-e74. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2018.02.115
Treatment of Aortic Regurgitation
Angiotensin II receptor blockers, for aortic root dilation
 6/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Aortic valve replacement or repair
Pharmacologic treatment of heart failure, if present
When aortic root dilatation is part of the mechanism of aortic regurgitation, angiotensin II receptor
blockers may slow progression of root dilation, making them favored medications for patients with
concomitant hypertension. These medications do not reduce the severity of aortic regurgitation or alter
disease progression.
Intervention is either surgical aortic valve replacement or (less commonly) valve repair . An aortic
bioprosthetic valve requires anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months postoperatively, but a mechanical valve
requires lifetime anticoagulation using warfarin. Long-term non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants or
warfarin can be considered in patients with a bioprosthetic valve and atrial fibrillation. (See also
Anticoagulation for patients with a prosthetic cardiac valve or native valve disease.)
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is challenging in AR because of the dilated aortic annulus
and lack of sufficient leaflet calcification, leading to prosthetic valve migration and/or paravalvular leak
(1).
Patients who are not candidates for surgery benefit from pharmacologic treatment of heart failure.
Beta-blockers should be used with caution because they block compensatory tachycardia and worsen
AR by prolonging diastole. Intra-aortic balloon pump insertion is contraindicated because the diastolic
balloon inflation worsens AR.
Patients with severe AR who do not meet the criteria for intervention should be reevaluated by physical
examination and echocardiography every 6 to 12 months.
Antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis is not recommended for aortic regurgitation except for
patients who have had valve replacement (see table Recommended Endocarditis Prophylaxis During
Oral-Dental or Respiratory Tract Procedures).
Indications for intervention
Intervention is indicated when:
AR is severe and is causing symptoms
AR is severe and is causing LV dysfunction (ejection fraction [EF] ≤ 55%, LV end-systolic
2
dimension > 50 mm, or indexed to body surface area > 25 mm/m )
AR is severe and at least 3 serial studies show a progressive decline in EF to 55 to 60%, or
progressive increase in LV end-diastolic dimension to > 65 mm
Patients with an enlarged ascending aorta frequently have AR as well as an increased risk of aortic
dissection. A high risk of aortic dissection may be the first indication for cardiac surgery, which should
be undertaken when
Ascending aortic diameter is > 55 mm
Bicuspid valve is present with ascending aortic diameter 50 to 55 mm and aortic growth
rate > 5 mm/year, aortic coarctation, or a family history of aortic dissection
 7/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Marfan syndrome is present with ascending aortic diameter > 50 mm (or less if the aortic
growth rate is > 5 mm/year) or a family history of aortic dissection at < 50 mm diameter
When cardiac surgery is being performed for other reasons, concomitant aortic surgery is indicated if
the ascending aortic diameter is ≥ 45 mm.
Treatment reference
1. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al: 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation
143(5):e35–e71, 2021. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000932
Prognosis for Aortic Regurgitation
With treatment, the 10-year survival for patients with mild to moderate aortic regurgitation is 80 to 95%.
With appropriately timed valve replacement (ie, before heart failure and using accepted criteria for
intervention), long-term prognosis for patients with moderate to severe AR is good. However, the
prognosis for patients with severe AR and heart failure is considerably poorer.
Key Points
The primary causes of acute aortic regurgitation (AR) are infective endocarditis and
dissection of the ascending aorta; chronic AR in adults is most often caused by
degeneration of the aortic valve or aortic root dilation.
Acute AR causes symptoms of heart failure and cardiogenic shock, but signs of AR may
be absent.
Chronic AR is typically asymptomatic for years followed by progressive exertional
dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Typical heart sounds with chronic AR include a normal first heart sound (S1) followed by
a sharp or slapping second heart sound (S2) and a blowing, high-pitched, decrescendo
diastolic murmur.
Acute AR requires prompt aortic valve replacement or repair.
Chronic AR requires aortic valve replacement or repair when symptoms or left
ventricular dysfunction develops; patients who meet criteria but are not candidates for
surgery benefit from treatment of heart failure.
AR is sometimes accompanied by a dilated ascending aorta. Indications for surgery on
the ascending aorta may occur before surgery is indicated for AR.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
 8/9

 Aortic Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 9/9
