=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Aortic Branch Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:51.205997",
  "file_size_bytes": 164430,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Aortic Branch Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Aortic Branch Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Aortic Branch Aneurysms
By Mark A. Farber, MD, FACS, University of North Carolina;
Federico E. Parodi, MD, University of North Carolina School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2024
Aneurysms may occur in any major aortic branch; such aneurysms are much
less common than abdominal or thoracic aortic aneurysms. Symptoms vary
depending on the location and artery affected but may include pain in areas
where the aneurysm compresses nearby structures. Diagnosis is made by
ultrasound, CT angiography, or MRI. Treatment is endovascular stent grafting or
surgery.
(See also Overview of Aortic Aneurysms, Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms, and Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms.)
Risk factors for aneurysms of aortic branch arteries include
Atherosclerosis
Hypertension
Cigarette smoking
Older age
Localized infection can cause mycotic aneurysms.
Subclavian artery aneurysms sometimes occur in patients with cervical ribs or thoracic outlet
compression syndrome.
Aneurysms of the arteries of the splanchnic circulation are uncommon. About 60% occur in the
splenic artery, 20% in the hepatic artery, 5.5% in the superior mesenteric artery (1).
Splenic artery aneurysms are more common in females than males (4:1). Causes include medial
fibromuscular dysplasia, portal hypertension, multiple pregnancies, penetrating or blunt abdominal
trauma, pancreatitis, and infection.
Hepatic artery aneurysms occur in more males than females (2:1). They may result from previous
abdominal trauma, illicit IV drug use, medial degeneration of the arterial wall, or periarterial
inflammation.
Renal artery aneurysms may dissect or rupture, causing acute occlusion.
 1/3

 Aortic Branch Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Superior mesenteric artery aneurysms occur equally in males and females. Causes include
fibromuscular dysplasia, cystic medial necrosis, and trauma.
General reference
1. Pasha SF, Gloviczki P, Stanson AW, Kamath PS. Splanchnic artery aneurysms. Mayo Clin Proc
2007;82(4):472-479. doi:10.4065/82.4.472
Symptoms and Signs of Aortic Branch Aneurysms
Many aortic branch aneurysms are asymptomatic. Symptoms (when they occur) vary depending on the
location and artery affected.
Subclavian aneurysms can cause local pain, a pulsating sensation, venous thrombosis or edema (due to
compression of adjacent veins), distal ischemic symptoms, transient ischemic attacks, stroke,
hoarseness (due to compression of the recurrent laryngeal nerve), or impaired motor and sensory
function (due to compression of the brachial plexus).
Splenic artery aneurysm may cause left upper quadrant abdominal pain.
Hepatic artery aneurysm may cause right upper quadrant pain and jaundice.
Superior mesenteric aneurysms may cause generalized abdominal pain and ischemic colitis.
Regardless of location, mycotic or inflammatory aneurysms may cause local pain and sequelae of
systemic infection (eg, fever, malaise, weight loss).
Diagnosis of Aortic Branch Aneurysms
Ultrasound, CT scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
With the routine availability of axial diagnostic imaging, many aneurysms are diagnosed before rupture.
Calcified asymptomatic or occult aneurysms may be seen on radiographs or other imaging tests done
for other reasons. Ultrasound, CT angiography, or MRI is typically used to detect or confirm aortic
branch aneurysms. Conventional angiography is typically reserved for treatment or to evaluate distal
organ perfusion.
Treatment of Aortic Branch Aneurysms
Open repair or sometimes endovascular stent grafting
Treatment is surgical removal and replacement with a graft. Endovascular repair is an option for some
patients. The decision to repair asymptomatic aneurysms is based on risk of rupture, extent and
location of the aneurysm, and perioperative risk.
 2/3

 Aortic Branch Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Surgery for subclavian artery aneurysms may involve removal of a cervical rib (if present) before repair
and replacement.
For splanchnic aneurysms, risk of rupture and death is as high as 10% and is particularly high for
women of childbearing age and for patients with hepatic aneurysms (> 35%) (1). Elective repair of
splanchnic aneurysms is therefore indicated for
Aneurysms > 2 cm in diameter
Aneurysms in pregnant women or women of childbearing age
Symptomatic aneurysms in any age group
Hepatic aneurysms
For splenic aneurysms, repair may consist of ligation without arterial reconstruction or aneurysm
exclusion and vascular reconstruction. Depending on location of the aneurysm, splenectomy may be
necessary.
Treatment of mycotic aneurysms is aggressive antibiotic therapy directed at the specific pathogen.
Generally, these aneurysms must also be surgically repaired.
Treatment reference
1. Garey ML, Greenberger S, Werman HA. Ruptured splenic artery aneurysm in pregnancy: a case
series. Air Med J 2014;33(5):214-217. doi:10.1016/j.amj.2014.05.006
Key Points
Aortic branch aneurysms are rarer than abdominal or thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Many are incidentally discovered and often asymptomatic.
When symptoms occur, they vary depending on the location and artery affected.
Diagnosis is often first suspected based on an incidental radiograph finding, and
confirmed using ultrasound and CT.
Treat with elective surgical repair and antibiotics in the case of mycotic aneurysms.
In general, indications for elective surgery are based on risk of rupture, extent and
location of the aneurysm, and perioperative risk. Pregnant women or women of child-
bearing age with splanchnic aneurysms and patients with hepatic aneurysms should be
operated on electively because of the high risk of rupture.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 3/3
