=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Arteriovenous Fistula - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:51.412250",
  "file_size_bytes": 128922,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Arteriovenous Fistula - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Arteriovenous Fistula - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Arteriovenous Fistula
(AV Fistula)
By James D. Douketis, MD, McMaster University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023
An arteriovenous fistula is an abnormal communication between an artery and
a vein.
An arteriovenous fistula may be congenital (usually affecting smaller vessels) or acquired as a result of
trauma (eg, a bullet or stab wound) or erosion of an arterial aneurysm into an adjacent vein. In patients
with end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis, an arteriovenous fistula is created surgically to
provide vascular access for the procedure.
The fistula may cause symptoms and signs of
Arterial insufficiency (eg, ulceration due to reduced arterial flow or ischemia)
Chronic venous insufficiency due to high-pressure arterial flow in the affected veins (eg,
peripheral edema, varicose veins, stasis pigmentation)
Emboli may pass from the venous to the arterial circulation (and cause ulceration when they lodge in
distal vessels), although pressure differences make this unlikely. If the fistula is near the surface, a mass
can be felt, and the affected area is usually swollen and warm with distended, often pulsating superficial
veins.
A thrill can be palpated over the fistula, and a continuous loud, to-and-fro (machinery) murmur with
accentuation during systole can be heard during auscultation.
Rarely, if a significant portion of cardiac output is diverted through the fistula to the right heart, high-
output heart failure develops.
Diagnosis of Arteriovenous Fistula
Clinical evaluation
Sometimes ultrasonography
Fistulas are diagnosed clinically based on presence of thrill, murmur, and other signs.
 1/2

 Arteriovenous Fistula - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Doppler ultrasonography is the best confirmatory test. For fistulas that cannot be visualized with
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or computed tomography angiography (CTA)
may be used. Imaging with conventional angiography is typically done when a catheter-based treatment
is planned.
Treatment of Arteriovenous Fistula
Sometimes percutaneous occlusion techniques
Sometimes surgery
Congenital fistulas do not require treatment unless significant complications develop. When necessary,
percutaneous vascular techniques can be used to place coils or plugs into the vessels to occlude the
fistula. Treatment is often effective but recurrent bleeding can still occur, especially in other locations.
Acquired fistulas usually have a single large connection and can be effectively treated by surgery.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 2/2
