=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:04.282323",
  "file_size_bytes": 1360333,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Atherosclerosis
By Attila Feher, MD, PhD, Yale University School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Oct 2025 | Modified Dec 2025
Atherosclerosis is characterized by the development of fatty and/or fibrous
intimal plaques (atheromas) in the arterial wall. Initially, the plaques contain
lipid materials, but over time they may become fibrosed and calcified. The key
pathophysiological processes in the development of atherosclerosis involve
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles, inflammatory cells, endothelial
dysfunction, smooth muscle cell proliferation, and remodeling of extracellular
matrix. Common risk factors include age, family history of premature
atherosclerotic disease, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular-kidney metabolic factors
(eg, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, chronic kidney disease), inflammation, and
lifestyle factors (eg, cigarette smoking,a sedentary lifestyle). Symptoms develop
when the growth or rupture of the plaque reduces or obstructs blood flow;
specific symptoms depend on the affected artery. Diagnosis is primarily clinical
and is confirmed by angiography, ultrasound, computed tomography, or other
imaging tests. Treatment includes lifestyle changes, addressing established risk
factors through the use of lipid-lowering medications, antiplatelet medications,
and antiatherogenic medications, as well as catheter-based and surgical
interventions.
Atherosclerosis can affect all large and medium-sized arteries, including the coronary, carotid, and
cerebral arteries,the aorta and its branches, and the major arteries of the extremities. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), ischemic heart disease (caused by atherosclerosis of the coronary
arteries) is the world's leading cause of death, accounting for 13% of all global fatalities between 2000
and 2021 (1). Since 2000, ischemic heart disease has had the largest surge in fatalities, increasing by 2.7
million to reach a total of 9.0 million deaths in 2021. In 2022, in the United States, approximately
942,000 people died of cardiovascular disease; heart disease and stroke caused more deaths than the
combined total of all cancer types and chronic lower respiratory diseases (2). Although ischemic heart
disease continues to be a leading cause of mortality, advancements in cardiovascular care and
prevention have resulted in significant declines in age-standardized cardiovascular mortality since 1950
(3, 4). However, a worrisome rapid increase in the prevalence of atherosclerosis has been noted in low
and middle income countries, in part due to an increase in hypertension, chronic disease, and overall
 1/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
caloric intake (5). Despite advances in care, atherosclerosis remains the leading cause of death
worldwide.
Atherosclerotic Plaque
IMAGE
BSIP VEM/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
General references
1. World Health Organization: The Global Health Observatory: Global health estimates: Leading
causes of death. Cause-specific mortality, 2000–2021. Accessed August 4, 2025.
2. Martin SS, Aday AW, Allen NB, et al. 2025 Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics: A Report of US and
Global Data From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2025;151(8):e41-e660.
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000001303
3. Fox CS, Evans JC, Larson MG, Kannel WB, Levy D. Temporal trends in coronary heart disease
mortality and sudden cardiac death from 1950 to 1999: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation.
2004;110(5):522-527. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000136993.34344.41
4. Mensah GA, Wei GS, Sorlie PD, et al. Decline in Cardiovascular Mortality: Possible Causes and
Implications. Circ Res. 2017;120(2):366-380. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.309115
5. Li Y, Cao GY, Jing WZ, Liu J, Liu M. Global trends and regional differences in incidence and
mortality of cardiovascular disease, 1990-2019: findings from 2019 global burden of disease
study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2023;30(3):276-286. doi:10.1093/eurjpc/zwac285
Pathophysiology of Atherosclerosis
The atherosclerotic plaque is the hallmark feature of atherosclerosis. It has a complex and dynamic
structure with the following major components:
Lipid core: Consists mainly of cholesterol, cholesterol esters, and other lipids
Fibrous cap: A layer of smooth muscle cells and collagen that covers the lipid core
 2/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Inflammatory cells and smooth muscle cells: Macrophages, T cells, and other immune
cells that infiltrate the plaque
Cell debris: Dead or necrotic cells
Calcium deposits: Contribute to the rigidity of the plaque
Extracellular matrix: Includes elastin, collagen, and other macromolecules, providing
structural support
Artery: Cross Section
3D MODEL
Atherosclerotic plaque formation
All stages of atherosclerosis, from initiation and growth to plaque complication (eg, myocardial
infarction, stroke), are considered a cytokine-mediated inflammatory response to injury (such as shear
stress from hypertension, or oxidative injury from tobacco smoke) (1).
During the initial stages of atherosclerotic plaque formation, apolipoprotein B-containing lipoproteins,
particularly low density lipoprotein (LDL) particles, accumulate in the intima, the innermost layer of the
arterial wall. Within the intimal layer, LDL particles are shielded from the protective antioxidant
mechanisms of the plasma, and, as a result, they undergo oxidation and other modifications mediated
by oxidative, lipolytic, and proteolytic enzymes, as well as reactive oxygen species. These chemical
modifications lead to a proinflammatory and immunogenic switch in phenotype.
This event triggers the migration of proinflammatory, classic monocytes into the intimal layer, facilitated
by adhesion molecules (eg, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 [VCAM-1]) expressed on the surface of
activated endothelial cells. The local abundance of chemoattractant cytokines facilitates the movement
of these bound monocytes into the arterial wall. Inside the intima, monocytes transform into
macrophages, expressing scavenger receptors that allow them to ingest lipoprotein particles and
become foam cells, a hallmark of the early atherosclerotic plaque. The migration of T cells also plays a
significant role in establishing the inflammatory environment of the developing atherosclerotic plaque
(2). In response to signals from the accumulating leukocytes, smooth muscle cells originating from the
tunica media also migrate into the intimal layer, augmenting the population of resident intimal smooth
muscle cells.
 3/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
As atherosclerotic plaques evolve, both resident and recruited smooth muscle cells produce
extracellular matrix molecules, including collagen, elastin, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans,
resulting in intimal thickening (3). Within the maturing lesion, smooth muscle cells and macrophages
proliferate. These smooth muscle cells and macrophages may also undergo necrosis or apoptosis
(programmed cell death), leading to the accumulation of cell debris and forming a necrotic, lipid-rich
core.
Certain chemokines, such as interferon gamma released by T cells, can inhibit the ability of smooth
muscle cells to produce interstitial collagen, thereby weakening their capacity to repair and sustain the
fibrous cap that overlays the necrotic core. Additionally, activated macrophages increase the production
of matrix metalloproteinases, a family of enzymes that can degrade the interstitial collagen vital for the
fibrous cap's strength. This degradation results in the thinning and weakening of the fibrous cap,
making the plaque more prone to rupture.
Plaque stability and rupture
Atherosclerotic plaques may be stable or unstable.
Stable plaques either regress, remain static, or grow slowly over several decades, potentially causing
vascular stenosis or occlusion. During the progression of the atherosclerotic lesion, the arterial wall
expands outwardly to preserve the vascular lumen (positive remodeling, also known as the Glagov
phenomenon) (4). This outward remodeling can mask the severity of atherosclerosis, allowing significant
plaque buildup without narrowing that is detectable with angiography.
Unstable, or "vulnerable," plaques are prone to spontaneous erosion or rupture, leading to acute
thrombosis, occlusion, and infarction, often long before they cause hemodynamically significant
stenosis. These plaques typically feature a large lipid core covered by a thin (< 60 microns) fibrous cap.
Most clinical events result from unstable plaques that do not appear hemodynamically significant when
examined with angiography. Therefore, plaque stabilization is a critical strategy to reduce morbidity and
mortality.
Plaque complications include plaque rupture and erosion.
Plaque rupture is the most common cause of acute coronary thrombosis leading to acute myocardial
infarctions (5, 6), particularly fatal ones.
The strength of the fibrous cap and its resistance to rupture depend on the balance between collagen
deposition and degradation. Plaque rupture involves secretion of metalloproteinases, cathepsins, and
collagenases by activated macrophages within the plaque. These enzymes digest the fibrous cap,
particularly at its edges, causing the cap to thin and ultimately rupture. T cells in the plaque contribute
by secreting cytokines that inhibit smooth muscle cells from synthesizing and depositing collagen, which
normally reinforces the plaque.
Once the plaque ruptures, the thrombogenic contents of the plaque are exposed to circulating blood,
triggering thrombosis. Tissue factor produced by macrophages and smooth muscle cells significantly
contributes to this process by promoting thrombin generation in vivo, leading to thrombin-mediated
fibrin formation from fibrinogen and activation of platelet aggregation. One of 4 outcomes may occur:
 4/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
The resultant thrombus may organize and be incorporated into the plaque, altering its
shape and causing its rapid growth.
The thrombus may rapidly occlude the vascular lumen, precipitating an acute ischemic
event.
The plaque may fill with blood, balloon out, and immediately occlude the artery.
Plaque contents or the thrombus may embolize, occluding vessels downstream.
Plaque stability depends on multiple factors, including plaque composition (relative proportions of
lipids, inflammatory cells, smooth muscle cells, connective tissue, and thrombus), wall stress (cap
fatigue), size and location of the core, and the configuration of the plaque in relation to blood flow.
Intraplaque hemorrhage, by contributing to rapid growth and lipid deposition, may play an important
role in transforming stable plaques into unstable plaques.
In general, unstable coronary artery plaques have a high macrophage content, a thick lipid core, and a
thin fibrous cap; they tend to rupture unpredictably, and often narrow the vessel lumen by < 50% (7, 8).
Unstable carotid artery plaques have a similar composition but typically cause problems through severe
stenosis and occlusion or by deposition of platelet thrombi, which embolize rather than rupture. Low-
risk plaques have a thicker cap and contain fewer lipids; they often narrow the vessel lumen by > 50%
and may produce predictable exercise-induced stable angina.
Clinical consequences of plaque rupture in coronary arteries depend not only on the anatomical
location of the plaque but also on the relative balance of procoagulant and anticoagulant activity in the
blood, as well as the vulnerability of the myocardium to arrhythmias.
Plaque erosion is the second most common underlying mechanism for acute coronary syndromes,
accounting for about one-third of the cases (and about two-thirds of non-ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarctions) (9, 10). Unlike plaque rupture, plaque erosion happens without breaking the
fibrous cap of the atherosclerotic plaque. The primary underlying mechanism is the loss of the
endothelial cells over an intact fibrous cap, exposing the underlying plaque material to the circulating
blood and triggering thrombosis. Erosion has been associated with the activation of innate immune
cells, especially through pattern- recognition receptors such as Toll-l ike receptor 2, and the activation of
polymorphonuclear leukocytes leading to the destruction of the endothelial lining (11). Lesions
complicated by plaque erosion tend to have a rich extracellular matrix with less lipid content and do not
exhibit a vulnerable thin fibrous cap.
Pathophysiology references
Risk Factors for Atherosclerosis
There are numerous risk factors for atherosclerosis (see table Risk Factors for Atherosclerosis) (1), both
modifiable and non-modifiable.
TABLE
Risk Factors for Atherosclerosis
 5/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Status Risk Factor
Age
Family history of premature
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
Nonmodifiable
and genetic predisposition*
Male sex†
Ethnicity (eg,South Asian ancestry)
Modifiable Dyslipidemia (lipid abnormalities):
High non-HDL and high LDL level,
especially small, dense LDL
High apolipoprotein B (ApoB) level
High lipoprotein (a) level
Hypertriglyceridemia
Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic factors:
Diabetes mellitus and insulin
resistance
Hypertension
Obesity, especially central obesity
Chronic kidney disease
Inflammation:
High C-reactive protein (CRP) level
Systemic inflammatory diseases (eg,
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, psoriasis,
vasculitides)
Clonal hematopoiesis of
indeterminate potential (CHIP)
Infection:
HIV
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Cytomegalovirus
Helicobacter pylori
Periodontal disease
Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-2 (COVID-19)
 6/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Status Risk Factor
Influenza
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Lifestyle:
Tobacco smoking
Sedentary lifestyle
Dietary factors such as low intake of
fruits and vegetables
Psychosocial factors (eg, chronic
stressors, anger and hostility,
depression, anxiety, socioeconomic
status)
Alcohol intake (other than moderate)
Other:
Prothrombotic states (eg,
hyperfibrinogenemia, high
plasminogen activator inhibitor level)
Radiation therapy to thorax
Treatment with chemotherapy
agents (eg, anthracyclines, taxanes,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, immune
checkpoint inhibitors)
Conditions specific to women (eg,
adverse pregnancy outcomes such
as. preeclampsia, premature
menopause)
 7/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
* Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is considered premature when it occurs in a male
first-degree relative before age 55 years and in a female first-degree relative before age 65
years. Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease includes coronary artery disease (myocardial
infarction, angina or coronary artery stenosis), cerebrovascular disease (transient ischemic
attack, ischemic stroke, carotid stenosis), peripheral artery disease, and aortic
atherosclerotic disease.
† Atherosclerosis is increasingly prevalent in young women and women members of
minority groups and populations in developing countries.
Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2019;74(10):e177-e232. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2019.03.010; Hamad R, Penko J, Kazi DS, et
al. Association of Low Socioeconomic Status With Premature Coronary Heart Disease in US
Adults. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5(8):899-908. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1458; Izquierdo-
Condoy JS, Arias-Intriago M, Becerra Cardona DA, García-Cañarte S, Vinueza-Moreano P.
Anticancer Chemotherapy-Induced Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease: A
Comprehensive Review. Life (Basel). 2025;15(2):245. doi:10.3390/life15020245; Levine GN,
Cohen BE, Commodore-Mensah Y, et al. Psychological Health, Well-Being, and the Mind-
Heart-Body Connection: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2021;143(10):e763-e783. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000947; Libby
P, Buring JE, Badimon L, et al. Atherosclerosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2019;5(1):56.
doi:10.1038/s41572-019-0106-zPandey AK, Blaha MJ, Sharma K, et al. Family history of
coronary heart disease and the incidence and progression of coronary artery calcification:
Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Atherosclerosis. 2014;232(2):369-376.
doi:10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.11.042; Szwed P, Gąsecka A, Zawadka M, et al. Infections
as Novel Risk Factors of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Diseases: Pathophysiological Links
and Therapeutic Implications. J Clin Med. 2021;10(12):2539. doi:10.3390/jcm10122539.
CRP = C-reactive protein, HDL = high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL = low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol.
Nonmodifiable risk factors
Age alone is a significant risk factor for the development of atherosclerosis. There is a dramatic increase
observed in the prevalence of peripheral artery disease, coronary artery disease and abdominal aortic
aneurysms with advanced age (2).
Male sex is a well-established risk factor for earlier and more severe atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (3). While younger women generally have a lower risk of atherosclerosis, by the time they reach
 8/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
their seventies, the incidence of myocardial infarction in women exceeds that of men, indicating an
interaction between sex and age (2).
Patients with a family history of premature cardiovascular disease also exhibit increased risk for
development of atherosclerosis (4). The list of genetic disorders documented in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis is growing and includes both monogenetic conditions such as familial
hypercholesterolemia associated with LDL receptor gene mutations, and polygenetic heredity.
There are significant ethnic differences in atherosclerosis risk. For example, people of South Asian
ancestry show a substantially higher risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease than people of
European ancestry (5).
Modifiable risk factors
Dyslipidemia
In the presence of dyslipidemia, apolipoprotein B-containing particles (mainly LDL) accumulate in the
intimal layer of the arteries where they undergo oxidation and switch to a pro-inflammatory phenotype.
This event leads to the migration and activation of inflammatory cells, primarily monocytes and T cells
(6). As a result, LDL plays a central role in the development of atherosclerosis. A growing body of
literature suggests that the risk for developing atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is proportional to
the cumulative exposure to LDL cholesterol, often referred to as cholesterol years (7). Additionally, the
concentration of small, dense, lipid-depleted LDL particles is a significant risk factor for atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) (8).
The main determinant for risk of ASCVD, however, is the concentration of atherogenic lipoprotein
particles, which is best reflected by the apolipoprotein B (ApoB) concentration, or by the non-high
density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol concentration if a specific ApoB test is unavailable (9). For risk
estimation, ApoB generally provides a more accurate and consistent prediction, especially in cases of
discordance between ApoB and LDL cholesterol (10). ApoB-100 is capable of binding the LDL receptor
and is responsible for cholesterol transport. It is also responsible for transporting oxidized
phospholipids and possesses proinflammatory properties.
HDL has been traditionally viewed as a protective factor against atherosclerosis by facilitating reverse
cholesterol transport. Studies indicate a U-shaped association between cardiovascular risk and HDL
levels, suggesting that individuals with both the lowest (< 40 mg/dL [< 1.0 mmol/L ] in men and < 50
mg/dL [< 1.3 mmol/L] in women) and highest (approximately 80 to 100 mg/dL [2.07 to 2.59 mmol/L])
HDL cholesterol levels face an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality (11, 12) (see table Cholesterol
Levels and Cardiovascular Risk).
Lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)] is a pro-atherogenic lipoprotein that consists of an LDL-like core associated with
an additional protein, apolipoprotein(a), which is covalently linked with the ApoB-100 molecule. Elevated
Lp(a) levels confer an independent risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (13). Lp(a) levels are
largely genetically determined and remain fairly stable throughout life.
Triglyceride-rich lipoproteins also play a significant role in the development of atherosclerosis.
Hypertriglyceridemia is an independent risk factor for atherosclerotic events, even in patients whose
 9/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
LDL levels are adequately controlled by statin therapy (residual triglyceride risk) (14).
Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic factors
Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome is an interconnected health disorder involving
obesity, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and cardiovascular disease (15). CKM syndrome includes
individuals at risk for atherosclerosis as well as those with existing atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease, with the following CKM stages (15):
Stage 0: No CKM risk factors
Stage 1: Excess or dysfunctional adiposity
Stage 2: Metabolic risk factors such as hypertriglyceridemia, hypertension, diabetes,
metabolic syndrome, or moderate- to high-risk chronic kidney disease
Stage 3: Subclinical cardiovascular disease in CKM syndrome or risk equivalents, such as
high predicted cardiovascular risk or very high-risk chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Stage 4: Clinical cardiovascular disease in CKM syndrome
Diabetes leads to formation of advanced glycation end products, which increase the production of
proinflammatory cytokines from endothelial cells (16). The oxidative stress and reactive oxygen radicals
generated in diabetes directly injure the endothelium and promote atherogenesis.
Hypertension is a well known risk factor for atherosclerosis. However, the underlying mechanisms are
not well established. Among other mechanisms, endothelial cell activation, oxidative stress, and the
contribution to smooth muscle cell proliferation have been implicated (17). ASCVD risk increases above
a threshold blood pressure as low as 115 mmHg (systolic) and 75 mmHg (diastolic), levels that do not
fall within the hypertensive range (18). Risk then continues to increase roughly linearly as blood
pressure increases (19, 20).
Chronic kidney disease promotes the development of atherosclerosis through several pathways,
including worsening hypertension, insulin resistance, and increased levels of lipoprotein(a),
homocysteine, fibrinogen, and C-reactive protein (21).
Inflammation
Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (high sensitivity CRP ≥ 2 mg/L) has been associated with an
increased risk of cardiovascular events, even in the presence of a normal lipid profile (or one well-
controlled on medication even if not completely normal), representing a "residual inflammatory risk"
(22). CRP is produced by the liver as a primary acute phase reactant and is involved in platelet activation
and the regulation of the innate immune mechanisms.
Autoimmune diseases are associated with an increased risk of developing atherosclerosis
independent of traditional risk factors (age, sex, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, blood pressure,
diabetes, and smoking) (23). The strongest associations have been described in conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis (24), systemic lupus erythematosus, Addison disease, and type 1 diabetes.
Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP), characterized by the presence of an
expanded somatic blood-cell clone in individuals without other hematologic abnormalities, is associated
 10/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
with nearly twice the risk of coronary artery disease and early-onset myocardial infarction (25).
Infection may also play a role in atherogenesis. Individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection are at increased risk for developing myocardial infarction and other atherosclerotic
complications due to a higher prevalence of traditional risk factors, immune cell activation, direct viral
effects on endothelial cells, altered lipoprotein metabolism, and antiretroviral therapy associated
dyslipidemia, and/or insulin resistance (26). Infections such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, cytomegalovirus,
Helicobacter pylori, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (COVID-19), influenza, respiratory
syncytial virus, those associated with periodontal disease, and others may cause endothelial dysfunction
through direct infection, exposure to endotoxins, or stimulation of systemic or subendothelial
inflammation (27).
Lifestyle
Tobacco smoke contains nicotine and other chemicals that are toxic to vascular endothelium. Smoking,
including passive smoking, increases platelet reactivity (potentially promoting platelet thrombosis) and
raises plasma fibrinogen levels (28, 29). Smoking increases LDL and decreases HDL levels, promotes
lipid peroxidation, induces vasoconstriction, and stimulates smooth muscle cell proliferation.
Sedentary lifestyle, diet, alcohol consumption, chronic stress and hostility, and other psychosocial
factors are also lifestyle-related risk factors for atherosclerotic disease.
Other risk factors
Prothrombotic states (see Overview of Thrombotic Disorders) increase the likelihood of
atherothrombosis.
Accelerated coronary atherosclerosis is also observed after thoracic radiation therapy (30).
Atherosclerosis is likely the result of radiation-induced endothelial injury associated with reactive
oxygen species production and intimal proliferation. In addition, certain chemotherapeutic agents
such as anthracyclines, taxanes, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and immune checkpoint inhibitors have been
implicated in the induction of oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, systemic inflammation, or
disrupted lipid metabolism, potentially contributing to the development or worsening of atherosclerosis
(31).
Premature menopause has been associated with a significantly increased risk for the development of
cardiovascular disease (32). Data suggest that young women with adverse pregnancy outcomes,
including preeclampsia, have a higher rate of coronary atherosclerosis compared to women without a
documented history of adverse pregnancy outcomes (33, 34).
Documented vascular disease
The presence of atherosclerotic disease in one vascular territory increases the likelihood of disease in
other vascular territories. Patients with noncoronary atherosclerotic vascular disease have cardiac event
rates comparable to those of patients with known coronary artery disease. As a result, they are
considered to have a coronary artery disease risk equivalent and should be treated as aggressively as
patients with coronary artery disease (35).
 11/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Assessing Overall Risk
Overall ASCVD risk is determined by a patient's individual risk factors. See Diagnosis - Asymptomatic
Patients (Screening) for information on determining overall ASCVD risk in individual patients using a risk
estimation calculator.
Risk factor references
Symptoms and Signs of Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is initially asymptomatic, often for decades. Symptoms and signs develop when lesions
impede blood flow (see table Clinical Manifestations of Atherosclerosis). The symptoms depend on the
vascular bed affected and the acuity and severity of blood flow impairment.
Unstable angina, myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, or resting pain in the limbs may develop when
unstable plaques rupture and acutely occlude a major artery, with superimposed thrombosis or
embolism. Plaque rupture may also cause sudden death without preceding angina.
TABLE
Clinical Manifestations of Atherosclerosis
Vascular Bed Acute Manifestations Chronic Manifestations
Transient ischemic attacks
Transient ischemic attack
and vascular dementia:
(TIA) or stroke: Sudden
Memory loss; confusion;
Carotid or cerebral neurologic symptoms (eg,
trouble with reasoning,
arteries numbness, weakness
planning, judgment,
especially when focal,
language, and other
confusion, aphasia)
thinking abilities
Acute coronary syndrome
(unstable angina and
myocardial infarction):
Stable coronary artery
Angina, dyspnea, nausea,
Coronary arteries disease: Angina, dyspnea,
vomiting, sweating,
fatigue
arrhythmia, hypotension,
shock, sudden cardiac
death
Thoracic aorta Dissection or thoracic Thoracic aortic aneurysm:
aortic aneurysm rupture: Often asymptomatic
Sudden severe chest or
upper back pain, dyspnea,
 12/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Vascular Bed Acute Manifestations Chronic Manifestations
syncope, hypotension,
shock
Abdominal aortic Abdominal aortic
aneurysm rupture: aneurysm: Throbbing or
Abdominal aorta Sudden severe abdominal deep back pain, pulsing
or back pain, dizziness, sensation in the abdomen,
hypotension, shock intermittent claudication
Acute mesenteric
ischemia: Sudden severe Chronic mesenteric
Mesenteric arteries abdominal pain, nausea, ischemia: Postprandial
vomiting, diarrhea, blood pain, weight loss
in the stool
Renovascular
Renal artery thrombosis:
hypertension and chronic
Sudden severe flank pain,
Renal arteries kidney disease: Difficult to
hematuria, nausea,
control hypertension, fluid
vomiting
retention, fatigue
Acute limb ischemia:
Peripheral artery disease:
Lower extremity Severe pain, coldness,
Claudication, rest pain,
peripheral arteries numbness, and pallor in
non-healing ulcers
the affected limb
Diagnosis of Atherosclerosis
Approach to diagnosis of atherosclerosis depends on the presence or absence of symptoms.
Symptomatic patients
Patients with signs and symptoms of ischemia (see table Clinical Manifestations of Atherosclerosis) are
evaluated for the extent and location of atherosclerotic disease burden and vascular occlusion using
various invasive and noninvasive tests, depending on the organ involved (see elsewhere in The Manual).
Noninvasive techniques that can assess atherosclerosis severity and plaque characteristics include:
Ankle-brachial index (ABI): The ABI is a simple, noninvasive test that compares the blood
pressure in the ankle with the blood pressure in the arm. It is used for the evaluation of
peripheral artery disease.
Vascular ultrasound: Doppler ultrasound is used to visualize atherosclerotic plaques and
assess the severity of stenosis. Vascular ultrasound can be used to assess the carotid
 13/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
arteries, renal arteries, abdominal aorta, and peripheral arteries. It offers high temporal
resolution without the use of ionizing radiation.
Noncontrast CT, including coronary artery calcium scoring CT: CT is used to evaluate
the presence and extent of calcified plaques. It can be used as a dedicated examination (eg,
coronary calcium scoring CT with standard ECG-gated image acquisition) or for
opportunistic evaluation using CT images acquired for other indications.
CT angiography (CTA): CTA uses iodinated contrast-enhanced CT to evaluate
atherosclerotic plaque morphology and detect stenosis severity with high spatial resolution.
This technique involves ionizing radiation and can be applied to any vascular bed, making it
ideal for small, mobile vascular beds like the coronary arteries.
CT fractional flow reserve (FFR): This technique combines CTA with computational fluid
dynamics to assess the physiologic significance of coronary artery stenoses by estimating
the pressure drop across a coronary lesion.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA): MRA may be done without contrast or with
gadolinium-based contrast. It is used to evaluate vascular size and/or stenosis severity
without exposing the patient to ionizing radiation. However, this technique has suboptimal
spatial resolution for visualizing small, mobile vascular beds.
Positron emission tomography (PET) molecular imaging: This technique uses molecular
imaging tracers to detect metabolic activity of atherosclerotic plaques (F18-
fluorodeoxyglucose [FDG]) or microcalcifications (F18-sodium fluoride).
Stress testing: Stress testing, which assesses the functional significance of coronary
stenosis, includes exercise treadmill test, stress echocardiography, or
exercise/pharmacological myocardial perfusion imaging (including single photon emission
tomography [SPECT], PET, or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]). PET and MRI myocardial
perfusion imaging can quantify myocardial blood flow, which also aids in the diagnosis of
coronary microvascular disease.
 14/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Magnetic Resonance Angiogram (MRA) with Gadolinium-Based Contrast
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF ATTILA FEHER, MD, PHD.
Fluorine-18–Labeled Deoxyglucose (FDG)/–Positron Emission Tomography...
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF ATTILA FEHER, MD, PHD.
Invasive catheter-based tests that can assess atherosclerosis severity and plaque characteristics include:
Invasive angiography: A catheter is inserted at the origin of the artery being investigated
and iodinated contrast is injected. This technique allows the severity of stenosis to be
estimated. In addition, therapeutic interventions, including thrombectomy and angioplasty,
can be conducted.
Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS): An intravascular ultrasound transducer is used to assess
the composition and extent of atherosclerotic plaques and to guide intravascular
 15/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
procedures.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT): This optical imaging-based method can be used to
assess the composition and extent of atherosclerotic plaques and guide intravascular
procedures.
Fractional flow reserve (FFR): A pressure wire is used to evaluate the hemodynamic
significance of a stenosis. FFR is based on the ratio of pressure distal and proximal to a
stenosis in the presence of maximal blood flow (hyperemia, typically induced by adenosine).
In coronary arteries, an FFR ≤ 0.80 indicates a hemodynamically significant stenosis.
Coronary flow reserve (CFR):-This technique uses a Doppler or a pressure-temperature
sensor-tipped guidewire to assess the functional significance of coronary artery disease and
microvascular disease by measuring the ratio of maximal flow in a coronary artery to the
flow under resting conditions.
Endothelial function testing: A vasoactive agent (eg, acetylcholine) is injected into the
coronary arteries to provoke vasospasm and assess the endothelial response.
Coronary Atherosclerosis (Diagnostic Tests)
IMAGE
IMAGES COURTESY OF ATTILA FEHER, MD, PHD.
Patients with symptoms also should be evaluated for atherosclerosis risk factors through the following
assessments (1, 2):
History and physical examination, including body mass index and waist circumference
Blood pressure measurement (to assess hypertension)
Fasting lipid profile with lipoprotein(a), apolipoprotein B, and high-sensitivity CRP
assessment if indicated
Fasting glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) levels
Renal function tests (to check for chronic kidney disease)
Smoking status, including passive smoking exposure
 16/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Assessment for any history of radiation therapy to the thoracic region
Evaluation of menopausal status and adverse pregnancy outcomes (eg, preeclampsia) in
females
Genetic testing for familial hypercholesterolemia (if family history suggests)
Screening for chronic infections that contribute to atherosclerosis, if clinically appropriate
Asymptomatic Patients (Screening)
In children without significant ASCVD risk factors, recommended obesity screening begins at age 2 to 6
years, blood pressure screening at age 3 years, and lipid screening at age 9 to11 years (3, 4, 5, 6).
For adults age 20 to 39 years, the evaluation of traditional ASCVD risk factors (age, sex, total cholesterol,
HDL cholesterol, blood pressure, diabetes, and smoking) is recommended. For adults age 40 to 75
years, the pooled cohort equation risk calculator is also recommended to evaluate 10-year ASCVD risk
(7).
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Cardiovascular Risk Assessment (10-year, Revised Pooled Cohort Equations
2018)
Other risk estimation calculators are available:
American Heart Association Predicting Risk of Cardiovascular Disease EVENTs
(PREVENT) calculator incorporates chronic kidney disease as a significant risk factor (see
PREVENT) (8), but this calculator has not been endorsed by any major cardiovascular
guidelines.
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2021 cardiovascular disease prevention guidelines
recommend using the Systemic Coronary Risk Estimation 2 (SCORE2) for individuals aged
40 to 69 and SCORE2-OP (Older Persons) for risk estimation for those over the age of 70 (9,
10).
Calcium scoring CT uses ECG-gated noncontrast CT to quantify calcified atherosclerotic plaque burden
and can be used for risk stratification and reclassification, to help make decisions about withholding or
recommending statin therapy. For example, in patients with intermediate risk (estimated 10-year ASCVD
risk ≥ 7.5% but < 20%) or in selected patients with borderline risk (estimated 10-year ASCVD risk ≥ 5%
but < 7.5%), if the calcium score is zero, it is reasonable to withhold statin therapy and reassess in 5 to
10 years as long as the patient does not smoke, does not have diabetes, and has no family history of
premature coronary artery disease; if the calcium score is ≥ 100, it is reasonable to initiate statin
therapy. A calcium score of zero has an excellent negative prognostic value, with an estimated 1% risk
for major adverse cardiovascular events over 10 years (11, 12).
 17/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Calcified Atherosclerosis on Calcium Scoring Computed Tomography (CT...
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF ATTILA FEHER, MD, PHD.
Diagnosis references
Prevention and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
Lifestyle changes:
Smoking cessation
Diet
Physical activity
Mental healthcare
Pharmacotherapy for established risk factors:
Lipid-lowering therapies
Antidiabetic or weight loss medications
Antihypertensives
Anti-inflammatory therapy
Antiplatelet medications
Anticoagulation
Thrombolytics
Catheter-based interventions:
Balloon angioplasty
Stenting
Atherectomy
Intravascular lithotripsy
 18/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Brachytherapy
Thrombectomy
Surgical intervention:
Bypass surgery
Endarterectomy
Aneurysm repair
Treatment involves aggressive modification of risk factors to slow progression and induce regression of
existing plaques. Given the well-established link between dyslipidemia and atherosclerosis, lowering
LDL is the cornerstone of the recommended therapy for established atherosclerotic disease (ASCVD).
Lifestyle changes include diet modification, smoking cessation, regular participation in physical activity,
stress reduction strategies, and limitation of alcohol use. Medications to treat dyslipidemia and other
underlying risk factors such as hypertension, and diabetes are often required. These lifestyle changes
and medications directly or indirectly improve endothelial function and reduce inflammation, and thus
serve a role both in prevention and treatment of clinical disease.
Lifestyle changes
Smoking cessation
Smoking is one of the most important preventable causes of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. In
current smokers, a combination of behavioral intervention and pharmacotherapy is recommended to
help with tobacco abstinence (1, 2). Pharmacotherapy options include nicotine replacement therapy,
varenicline, or bupropion (see also Smoking Cessation).
Dietary changes that reduce cardiovascular risk
Key dietary recommendations for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis include (1, 2):
Prioritize the consumption of fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts, whole grains, and fish
Reduce the intake of saturated fat and trans fat and replace them by polyunsaturated and
monounsaturated fats
Reduce the intake of dietary cholesterol and sodium
Limit the intake of simple sugars, refined carbohydrates, sweetened beverages, and
processed meats
Limit alcohol consumption
In their prevention guidelines, the European Society of Cardiology provides specific dietary
recommendations (1):
Fiber intake: 30 to 45 grams per day, preferably from whole grains
Fruit consumption: At least 200 grams per day (≥ 2 to 3 servings)
Vegetable consumption: At least 200 grams per day (≥ 2 to 3 servings)
Nuts: 30 grams of unsalted nuts per day
 19/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Red meat consumption: Reduction to less than 350 to 500 grams per week
Fish consumption: 1 to 2 times per week.
Diets that include increased consumption of fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts, whole grains, and lean
protein (preferably fish) have consistently been shown to improve survival compared to standard diets
low in these ingredients (3, 4, 5). Studies also show that improved outcomes are associated with a
Mediterranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or nuts, daily intake of 5 servings of fruits
and vegetables, and intake of polyunsaturated fatty acids (found in plant-based oils, seeds, and fatty
fish) and monounsaturated fatty acids (found in oils, avocados, and nuts) (6, 7).
Dietary elements that increase cardiovascular risk
Saturated fats (found in animal products and certain oils) and trans fats (prevalent in processed and
fried foods) are associated with increased all-cause mortality, supporting recommendations to replace
saturated and trans fats with unsaturated fats in the diet (8). Saturated fats should account for less than
10% of total energy intake, and should be replaced by polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fatty
acids, as well as carbohydrates from whole grains (1).
Reduction in dietary sodium intake has been associated with lowered blood pressure and a reduced
rate of cardiovascular events. Consuming more than 2 grams of sodium per day is linked to increased
cardiovascular mortality (9).
Consuming added sugar exceeding 10% of daily calories has been linked to higher cardiovascular
mortality (10). Additionally, the use of sweetened beverages and juices has been associated with an
increased rate of coronary events and cardiovascular mortality (4).
The frequency and amount (> 14 g/day) of red and processed meat consumption has been associated
with a higher risk of cardiovascular mortality (9).
Several large studies suggest that any amount of alcohol consumption is associated with increased
atherosclerotic disease risk, challenging prior data suggesting that a low or moderate level of alcohol
consumption is associated with lower risk of, or could even be protective against, atherosclerotic
disease (11, 12, 13). Current recommendations include limiting alcohol consumption to less than 100
grams per week or 1 drink daily for women and 2 drinks daily for men, avoiding binge drinking, and not
initiating alcohol consumption as a preventive measure against ASCVD (1, 14).
Physical activity and exercise
Sedentary behavior is a well-established cardiovascular risk factor (15). Regular physical activity leads to
improvements in measures of obesity, diabetes and insulin resistance, hypertension, and dyslipidemia,
as well as enhancing endothelial function and reducing systemic inflammation; all of these collectively
help reduce the risk of ASCVD (16, 17, 18, 19). Recommendations for all adults are to engage in at least
150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 to 150 minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity
weekly. For adults who are not able to perform these activities, the recommendation is to stay as active
as their health condition allows (2). Resistance exercise for 2 or more days per week is also
recommended (1).
 20/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Stress reduction and mental health care
Stress reduction strategies, in particular cognitive behavioral therapy, have been shown to improve
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with known ASCVD (20, 21). Multiple studies have also
demonstrated that the treatment of depression reduces cardiovascular risk (22, 23).
Pharmacotherapy
Lipid lowering therapy
Statins primarily lower cardiovascular risk by inhibiting hepatic cholesterol synthesis through the
inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase, which leads to the upregulation of liver LDL receptors and increased
LDL clearance from the blood. Other potential beneficial effects of statins include enhanced endothelial
nitric oxide production, stabilization of atherosclerotic plaques, reduced lipid accumulation in the
arterial wall, and regression of plaques (24). However, statins may also carry risks, including myalgia
and, rarely, rhabdomyolysis, as well as an increased risk of new-onset diabetes and potential liver
enzyme elevations (25, 26).
Statin therapy is indicated for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in the following groups (2):
Adults aged 20 to 75 years with high low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels (≥ 190
mg/dL [≥ 4.9 mmol/L]): Maximally tolerated statin therapy
High-risk adults (estimated 10-year ASCVD risk: > 20%): High-intensity statin therapy
Adults with diabetes and multiple ASCVD risk factors: High-intensity statin therapy
Adults (aged 40 to 75 years) with diabetes, regardless of estimated 10-year ASCVD risk:
Moderate-intensity statin therapy (consider high-intensity)
Intermediate-risk adults (estimated 10-year ASCVD risk: 7.5% to < 20%): Moderate-intensity
statin therapy, following a discussion about risks
Intermediate-risk adults (estimated 10-year ASCVD risk: 7.5% to < 20%) and adults with
borderline risks (estimated 10-year ASCVD risk 5% to < 7.5%) with a calcium score
measurement:
Score of 0, and no diabetes, family history of premature ASCVD,
cigarette smoking: Reasonable to withhold statin therapy and
reassess in 5 to 10 years
Score of 1 to 99: Reasonable to initiate statin therapy for patients ≥ 55
years
Score of 100 or higher or 75th percentile or higher: Reasonable to
initiate statin therapy
Intermediate-risk adults with risk-enhancing factors: Consider initiating or intensifying statin
therapy
Borderline-risk adults with risk-enhancing factors: Consider moderate-intensity stating
therapy
High-intensity statin therapy has the goal of lowering LDL cholesterol by ≥ 50%. Moderate-intensity
stating therapy has the goal of lowering LDL cholesterol by 30 to 50%. Maximally tolerated statin
 21/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
therapy is the highest dose that is tolerated by the patient.
In patients with acute coronary syndrome, ischemic stroke, or established atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (including peripheral artery disease), high-intensity statin therapy is recommended (27, 28, 29,
30). For patients already on maximally tolerated statin therapy who have an LDL cholesterol level of ≥ 70
mg/dL (≥ 1.8 mmol/L), a non-statin lipid-lowering agent is recommended. In addition, for this high-risk
patient population, it is reasonable to further intensify lipid-lowering therapy if the LDL cholesterol level
is 55 to 70 mg/dL (1.4 to 1.8 mmol/L) and the patient is already on a maximally tolerated statin therapy.
Ezetimibe lowers LDL cholesterol by blocking the uptake of cholesterol from the small intestine. When
added to standard statin therapy, ezetimibe has been shown to reduce cardiovascular events in both
patients with a prior acute coronary syndrome, and those with chronic coronary artery disease at very
high risk, particularly when LDL cholesterol levels are ≥ 70 mg/dL ( ≥ 1.8 mmol/L) despite maximally
tolerated statin therapy (29, 31).
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors, or PCSK9 inhibitors, are monoclonal antibodies
(evolocumab, alirocumab) that target PCSK9. PCSK9 binds to LDL receptors on the surface of liver cells,
promoting their degradation; the inhibition of PCSK9 leads to increased clearance of plasma LDL
cholesterol. Clinical trials with evolocumab and alirocumab have shown reduction in atherosclerosis and
cardiovascular events (34, 33). PCSK9 inhibitors are most frequently used in patients with severe
primary hypercholesterolemia (LDL cholesterol ≥ 190 mg/dL [≥ 4.9 mmol/L]), with or without familial
hypercholesterolemia, or in patients with established ASCVD for whom target LDL could not be achieved
with maximally tolerated statin therapy. Inclisiran is a small interfering RNA (siRNA) therapeutic that also
inhibits production of PCSK9 and has been shown to provide sustained LDL-lowering effects with
infrequent (twice-yearly) dosing (34).
Other therapeutic agents, including small interfering RNAs (eg, olpasiran, lepodisiran) and antisense
oligonucleotide technology (eg, pelacarsen), aim to specifically reduce lipoprotein(a) levels and are being
evaluated for their efficacy and safety (35, 36).
Eicosapent ethyl is a highly purified form of eicosapentaenoic acid, a key omega-3 fatty acid. It reduces
triglyceride levels by inhibiting liver triglyceride synthesis and enhancing the clearance of triglyceride-
rich lipoproteins and has anti-inflammatory, endothelial stabilizing, and antiplatelet effects (37). It
significantly reduces cardiovascular event rates in patients with cardiovascular disease who have
elevated triglyceride levels despite statin therapy (38). Unlike prescription eicosapent ethyl, over-the-
counter fish oil supplements typically contain a mixture of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic
acid in lower and variable doses and have not consistently demonstrated cardiovascular event
reduction in large clinical trials (39, 40).
Antiplatelet medications
Oral antiplatelet medications are essential in preventing atherosclerosis-related complications as most
events originate from plaque fissure or rupture, leading to platelet activation and thrombosis. The
following medications can be used:
Aspirin irreversibly inhibits cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and disrupts thromboxane A2
production, inhibiting platelet activation and aggregation.
 22/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
P2Y12 inhibitors (eg, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor) block the adenosine diphosphate
(ADP)-mediated activation of platelets.
Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and an oral P2Y12 inhibitor is indicated for at least 12 months in
patients with acute coronary syndrome who are not at high risk for bleeding (29). For individuals with
low to moderate bleeding risk following acute coronary syndrome, it is recommended to switch from
dual antiplatelet therapy to single antiplatelet therapy at 6 months following percutaneous coronary
intervention (30).
Aspirin monotherapy at a low dose (75 to 100 mg) is recommended to reduce atherosclerotic events in
patients with chronic coronary artery disease and no indication for oral anticoagulation (30). For
patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease, antiplatelet monotherapy with aspirin (75 to 325
mg daily) is also recommended to reduce the risk of adverse cardiovascular events (27). While aspirin
therapy is a cornerstone of secondary prevention in patients with established cardiovascular disease, its
role in primary prevention is controversial, and it is not recommended routinely for this purpose (2).
Single antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel (75 mg daily) or aspirin (75 to 325 mg daily) is also
recommended for preventing adverse events in patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease
(27).
Among the available P2Y12 inhibitors, clopidogrel is the least potent and takes the longest time to reach
maximum platelet inhibition. While other P2Y12 inhibitors (prasugrel and ticagrelor) are more potent,
they are also associated with higher bleeding risk. Therefore, in acute coronary syndrome, the use of
clopidogrel is only recommended when other P2Y12 inhibitors are not available, not tolerated, or
contraindicated (29). In individuals with a high risk of bleeding, de-escalation from dual antiplatelet
therapy to single antiplatelet therapy with ticagrelor is recommended one month after percutaneous
coronary intervention (29). The recommended duration of antiplatelet therapy also depends on
concurrent anticoagulation. For example, no additional antiplatelet therapy is recommended in patients
already on therapeutic anticoagulation who have no recent history of percutaneous revascularization or
myocardial infarction.
Other medications
Beyond lipid-lowering agents and antiplatelet agents, additional medications are considered in patients
with specific risk profiles or comorbidities. For example, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists are used in patients with diabetes and
heart failure, while anti-inflammatory therapies such as canakinumab or colchicine may benefit patients
with persistent inflammatory risk after myocardial infarction. In selected patients with peripheral artery
disease or after revascularization, low-dose anticoagulation combined with aspirin is recommended to
further reduce ischemic events.
Thrombolysis remains a cornerstone for treatment of acute ischemic stroke (28). Thrombolysis involves
administration of intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), such as alteplase, to dissolve occlusive
thrombi that are obstructing cerebral blood flow. It is recommended for eligible patients who can be
treated within 4.5 hours of the onset of stroke symptoms. Key indications include the diagnosis of acute
ischemic stroke with measurable neurologic deficits, exclusion of intracranial hemorrhage by imaging,
and careful consideration of contraindications such as recent surgery or gastrointestinal bleeding,
 23/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
concomitant use of anticoagulants, and severe uncontrolled hypertension. The primary goal is to
restore cerebral perfusion, minimize brain injury, and improve clinical outcomes.
In acute coronary syndromes, the use of systemic thrombolysis is restricted to ST elevation myocardial
infarction when the anticipated delay from first medical contact to primary percutaneous intervention is
expected to be greater than 120 minutes (29).
Antihypertensives primarily affect atherosclerosis by reducing pressure and thus stress on the arterial
wall. This effect is particularly important in aortic aneurysms, where the risk of rupture is directly related
to blood pressure (41). For patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm, antihypertensive therapy is
recommended with systolic blood pressure of ≥ 130 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure of ≥ 80 mm Hg.
By lowering glucose levels, some antihyperglycemic medications mitigate the harmful effects of
hyperglycemia, which include endothelial dysfunction, increased oxidative stress, and chronic
inflammation. The SGLT2 inhibitors reduce serum glucose by inhibiting renal glucose reabsorption,
leading to glucosuria. SGLT2 inhibitors have demonstrated favorable effects on lipid metabolism,
reduced inflammation, and improved endothelial function (42), and they have been associated with
reduction in some major cardiovascular outcomes (43).
GLP-1 receptor agonists act by enhancing glucose-dependent insulin secretion, inhibiting glucagon
secretion, and slowing gastric emptying. These agents may have substantial cardiovascular benefits, by
preventing endothelial dysfunction through the promotion of angiogenesis and inhibition of oxidative
stress; reducing systemic inflammation; and reducing monocyte recruitment, formation of
proinflammatory macrophages and foam cells, vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, and plaque
development (44).
Canakinumab, an anti-inflammatory monoclonal antibody targeting interleukin-1beta, showed a
significant reduction in cardiovascular events in patients with prior myocardial infarction and an
elevated C-reactive protein level (45).
Colchicine, by inhibiting microtubule polymerization and consequent suppression of inflammatory cell
activation and adhesion, has been shown to prevent major adverse cardiovascular events in patients
with recent myocardial infarction and in patients with chronic coronary disease (but not in the setting of
acute myocardial infarction) (46, 47).
Although routine anticoagulation is not generally advised for atherosclerosis treatment (or
prevention), it can play a supplementary role in some cases. The combination of low-dose rivaroxaban
(2.5 mg twice daily) and low-dose aspirin is recommended to reduce the risk of adverse cardiovascular
and limb-related events in patients with symptomatic peripheral artery disease or following peripheral
surgical or endovascular revascularization (27). Additionally, to reduce ischemic events in patients with
ST elevation myocardial infarction treated with intravenous thrombolysis, parenteral anticoagulation is
recommended to be continued for the entire hospital stay (up to 8 days) or until revascularization (29).
Catheter-based interventions
Catheter based interventions typically involve the displacement or removal of stenotic or occlusive
atherosclerotic plaques. These interventions play an important role in the treatment of both acute
 24/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
complications of atherosclerosis and the management of hemodynamically significant chronic
atherosclerotic lesions. In general, a lesion is considered hemodynamically significant when it results in
impaired blood flow sufficient to cause symptoms or objective evidence of ischemia. While the exact
thresholds vary by vascular territory, this often corresponds to luminal narrowing of ≥ 50% in coronary
or carotid arteries when associated with clinical symptoms or imaging evidence of reduced perfusion
and ≥ 70% for asymptomatic lesions. Functional assessments, such as fractional flow reserve (FFR) in the
coronary circulation or pressure gradients and flow measurements in peripheral vessels, are also used
to more accurately define hemodynamic significance. Treatment modalities include:
Balloon angioplasty
Stenting
Atherectomy
Intravascular lithotripsy
Thrombectomy
Brachytherapy
See also Percutaneous Coronary Interventions (PCI) for more information about catheter-based
interventions in the setting of coronary artery disease.
Balloon angioplasty
Balloon angioplasty, also referred to as "plain-old balloon angioplasty" (POBA), is a percutaneous
intervention involving advancement of a catheter with a deflated balloon to the site of arterial stenosis.
The balloon is then inflated to compress atherosclerotic plaque materials against the vessel wall,
thereby restoring luminal diameter and blood flow.
In addition to POBA, other techniques are available, including:
Drug-coated balloon angioplasty, which involves inflating a balloon that is coated with an
antiproliferative medication such as paclitaxel or sirolimus. These medications help to
prevent restenosis by inhibiting smooth muscle cell proliferation.
Cutting balloon angioplasty uses a balloon with micro blades on its surface to create
controlled incisions in the plaque as the balloon is inflated. This technique is designed to
treat resistant calcific lesions.
Stenting
Stent placement is frequently performed following balloon angioplasty. It involves the placement of an
expandable metallic scaffold within an atherosclerotic artery to preserve luminal integrity and maintain
adequate blood flow. Stenting can be performed by using:
Bare-metal stents are rarely used due to high restenosis rates and the superiority of drug-
eluting stents.
Drug-eluting stents are most frequently used. These stents are coated with
antiproliferative agents such as sirolimus, everolimus, paclitaxel, or zotarolimus to inhibit
neointimal hyperplasia and reduce restenosis.
 25/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Covered stents are encased with a synthetic covering to seal aneurysms or manage other
vascular abnormalities.
Biodegradable stents are designed to provide temporary scaffolding to maintain vessel
patency and then gradually dissolve, potentially reducing long-term complications such as
restenosis. Trials have shown mixed results in terms of outcomes compared to drug-eluting
stents, so biodegradable stents are not standard of care (48).
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is the insertion of a stent-graft via a catheter into
the arterial lumen, followed by precise deployment within the aneurysm to strengthen the
vessel wall and prevent aneurysmal rupture. EVAR is commonly used for the treatment of
abdominal and thoracic aortic aneurysms (27).
In specific patient populations, such as those undergoing stenting of complex coronary lesions or left
main disease, the use of intravascular imaging techniques such as intravascular ultrasound or optical
coherence tomography is recommended for procedural guidance to optimize stent deployment and
reduce future ischemic events (29).
Atherectomy
Atherectomy is an endovascular technique designed to excise or ablate atherosclerotic plaques from
arterial walls, thereby restoring luminal patency and optimizing vascular flow. Potential techniques
include:
Rotational atherectomy, which uses a high-speed, rotating diamond-coated burr to
pulverize hard, calcific plaques.
Orbital atherectomy, which uses a diamond-coated crown that orbits within the artery,
sanding down and pulverizing calcified plaques.
Laser atherectomy, which uses a laser-emitting catheter to vaporize plaque, converting it
into small particles.
Intravascular lithotripsy
Intravascular lithotripsy uses acoustic shock waves to fracture and disrupt calcified atherosclerotic
plaques. This technique is particularly effective in addressing heavily calcified plaques and is typically
followed by balloon angioplasty and stent placement (49). It is primarily used in the treatment of
coronary arteries and peripheral vessels (50).
Thrombectomy
Thrombectomy is a procedure used to remove intravascular thrombi to restore circulation. It can be
performed using several techniques:
Mechanical thrombectomy: Mechanical removal of the thrombus using specialized
devices
Aspiration thrombectomy: Aspiration of the thrombus using a suction device
Catheter-directed thrombolysis: Thrombolytic medications are delivered directly to the
thrombus to dissolve it
 26/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Thrombectomy can be the preferred procedure in patients with acute stroke (28) or acute limb ischemia
(27). However, in patients with acute coronary syndrome, the use of manual or aspiration
thrombectomy is not recommended due to the lack of demonstrated benefit (29).
Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy delivers targeted radiation therapy within the arteries to prevent restenosis following
angioplasty and stenting. Using a specialized catheter, radioactive isotopes are positioned at the site of
the treated artery, where they emit localized radiation that inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation, thereby preventing neointimal hyperplasia. This localized radiation treatment is
particularly beneficial for patients with recurrent in-stent restenosis (51).
Surgical interventions
Surgical techniques for atherosclerotic disease include:
Bypass surgery
Surgical endarterectomy
Aneurysm repair
Bypass surgery involves creating arterial connections to "bypass" blocked arteries using autogenous or
prosthetic grafts, restoring blood flow to the affected area. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is
critical in treating multivessel coronary artery disease (29, 51) and lower extremity peripheral artery
disease (27). The decision to perform surgical or catheter-based revascularization in complex coronary
artery disease should involve guideline-directed discussions, a team-based approach, and shared
decision making. Patients with triple-vessel disease who have diabetes ideally should undergo surgical
revascularization, with the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) grafted to the left anterior descending
(LAD) artery, unless they are poor candidates for surgery, in which case percutaneous revascularization
could be considered.
Surgical endarterectomy involves the excision of atherosclerotic plaque from the intimal layer of the
artery, thereby restoring luminal diameter and improving blood flow. The most frequently performed
variant is carotid endarterectomy, which is used to reduce ischemic stroke rate in patients with high-
grade carotid stenosis. While recommendations vary, carotid endarterectomy is generally strongly
recommended in patients with 70 to 99% symptomatic carotid stenosis (ie, those who have experienced
a transient ischemic attack or stroke within the last 6 months corresponding to the vascular territory of
the narrowed vessel) (52, 53). Early intervention is emphasized. Carotid endarterectomy may also be
considered in patients with 50 to 69% symptomatic stenosis or in those with ≥ 60% asymptomatic
stenosis, depending upon life expectancy and perioperative risk.
Aneurysm repair involves the surgical reinforcement of the weakened segment of an artery to prevent
rupture. This is accomplished by replacing the aneurysmal vessel with a synthetic graft, which ensures
vascular integrity. This procedure is primarily indicated for acute aortic complications or for large, high-
risk abdominal and thoracic aortic aneurysms (39). The threshold for intervention varies based on
several factors, including aneurysm size, location, growth rate, patient symptoms, and overall risk of
rupture.
 27/28

 Atherosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment references
Key Points
The development of atherosclerosis involves the deposition of LDL particles, recruitment
of inflammatory cells, endothelial dysfunction, and proliferation of smooth muscle cells,
leading to the formation of fibrous and calcified plaques within the arterial wall.
Risk factors for atherosclerosis include age, family history of premature atherosclerosis,
dyslipidemia, cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic factors (diabetes, hypertension, obesity
and chronic kidney disease), inflammation, and lifestyle related risk factors (smoking,
sedentary lifestyle, diet, alcohol consumption, and psychosocial factors).
Symptoms develop when plaque growth or rupture leads to reduced or obstructed
blood flow, resulting in conditions such as angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, and
claudication.
Diagnosis is typically confirmed through clinical evaluation and imaging techniques such
as ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, or computed tomography.
Management includes lifestyle changes and medications such as lipid-lowering agents
(statins, PCSK9 inhibitors, ezetimibe), antiplatelet medications (aspirin, P2Y12 inhibitors),
antihypertensives, and antihyperglycemic agents (SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor
agonists) to stabilize plaques and prevent cardiovascular events.
Catheter-based interventions include balloon angioplasty with or without stenting,
atherectomy, intravascular lithotripsy, thrombectomy, and brachytherapy to
mechanically manage and stabilize plaques or remove thrombi.
Surgical interventions aim to bypass (bypass grafting) or remove (endarterectomy)
severe atherosclerotic lesions, while aneurysm repair with synthetic grafts is performed
to prevent rupture.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 28/28
