=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:42.552438",
  "file_size_bytes": 399205,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White
Syndrome (WPW Syndrome)
By L. Brent Mitchell, MD, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, University of Calgary
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Sept 2024 | Modified Oct 2024
In Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, antegrade conduction occurs over an
accessory pathway. If atrial fibrillation, develops this is a medical emergency
because very rapid ventricular rates can develop.
(See also Overview of Arrhythmias and Atrial Fibrillation.)
In manifest Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, antegrade conduction occurs over the accessory
pathway. If atrial fibrillation develops, the normal rate-limiting effects of the atrioventricular (AV) node
are bypassed, and the resultant excessive ventricular rates (sometimes 200 to 300 beats/minutes) may
lead to ventricular fibrillation (see figure Atrial Fibrillation in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome) and
sudden death (1).
Patients with an accessory AV connection that does not conduct in the antegrade direction do not have
the short PR interval and delta wave characteristic of WPW syndrome (concealed WPW syndrome).
However, they may still have orthodromic reciprocating atrioventricular supraventricular tachycardia, in
which the accessory AV connection is used in the retrograde direction, but they are not at risk of rapid
conduction of atrial fibrillation, in which the accessory AV connection is used in the antegrade direction).
 1/3

 Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Atrial Fibrillation in Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome
Ventricular response is very fast (RR intervals minimum of 160 msec). Shortly thereafter,
ventricular fibrillation develops (lead II continuous rhythm strip at bottom).
General reference
1. Klein GJ, Bashore TM, Sellers TD, et al: Ventricular fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome. N Engl J Med 301(20):1080–1085, 1979. doi: 10.1056/NEJM197911153012003
Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation and WPW Syndrome
Direct-current cardioversion
The treatment of choice for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with atrial fibrillation is direct current
cardioversion (1). The usual rate-slowing medications used in atrial fibrillation are not effective, and
digoxin, adenosine, and the nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) that
may be used in many other forms of supraventricular tachycardia are contraindicated because they
may increase the ventricular rate and cause ventricular fibrillation.
If cardioversion is impossible, medications that prolong the refractory period of the accessory
connection should be used. IV procainamide or ibutilide is preferred (1), but any class Ia, class Ic, or class
III antiarrhythmic medication can be used.
 2/3

 Atrial Fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Pearls & Pitfalls
Do not give digoxin, adenosine, or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (eg,
verapamil, diltiazem) to patients with atrial fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome because these medications may trigger ventricular fibrillation.
Treatment reference
1. Joglar JA, Chung MK, Armbruster AL, et al: 2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS Guideline for the Diagnosis
and Management of Atrial Fibrillation: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 149(1):e1–e156, 2024.
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001193
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 3/3
