=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Bicuspid Aortic Valve - Pediatrics - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:38.509604",
  "file_size_bytes": 141584,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Bicuspid Aortic Valve - Pediatrics - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Bicuspid Aortic Valve - Pediatrics - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Bicuspid Aortic Valve
By Lee B. Beerman, MD, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Reviewed By Michael SD Agus, MD, Harvard Medical School
Reviewed/Revised Apr 2023
Bicuspid aortic valve is the presence of only two (rather than the normal three)
valve cusps.
Bicuspid aortic valve is the most common congenital cardiovascular abnormality. It is present in 0.5 to 2
% of live births (1).
Patients with bicuspid aortic valve are predisposed to developing infective endocarditis, aortic
regurgitation, and/or aortic stenosis. Bicuspid aortic valve can also be associated with dilation of the
aortic root or ascending aorta and with coarctation of the aorta.
There is a genetic predilection for bicuspid aortic valves, with a 9% reported family prevalence, so first-
degree relatives of patients with a bicuspid aortic valve should undergo screening echocardiography.
Recognition of a bicuspid valve, even in a patient who has normal valve function, is important for
purposes of follow-up because of the association of bicuspid valves with an aortopathy that results in
progressive aortic root or ascending aortic dilation and aneurysm formation. The reported prevalence
of this complication varies widely in different studies, but, in general, dilatation will occur in up to 56% of
those aged < 30 years (2).
General references
1. Freeze SL, Landis BJ, Ware SM, Helm BM: Bicuspid aortic valve: a review with recommendations
for genetic counseling. J Genet Couns 25(6):1171–1178, 2016.
2. Tadros TM, Klein MD, Shapira OM: Ascending aortic dilatation associated with bicuspid aortic
valve: pathophysiology, molecular biology, and clinical implications. Circulation 119(6):880–890,
2009. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.795401
Symptoms and Signs of Bicuspid Aortic Valve
Children with bicuspid aortic valve may be asymptomatic if there is little or no valve dysfunction.
Symptoms depend on the type of complication and can include fever in infective endocarditis or
dyspnea, fatigue, syncope, palpitations, and exercise intolerance due to valvular regurgitation or
stenosis.
 1/2

 Bicuspid Aortic Valve - Pediatrics - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Examination reveals an early systolic click, a systolic ejection murmur and, if aortic regurgitation is
present, a diastolic decrescendo murmur.
Diagnosis of Bicuspid Aortic Valve
Physical examination
Echocardiography
Diagnosis is by physical examination findings and echocardiography. Physical examination usually
reveals a prominent early systolic ejection sound (click) at the apex and base of the heart. This finding is
often best heard with the patient sitting; the examiner listens at the apex for a click just after the first
heart sound (S1), simulating a prominent split of S1. There may be a basal systolic murmur due to aortic
stenosis or a high-pitched diastolic murmur if aortic regurgitation is present.
Echocardiography shows the characteristic finding of fusion of two of the three aortic valve leaflets.
Fusion of the right coronary and left coronary leaflets is the most common morphology. Children with
fusion of the right coronary and noncoronary leaflets are more likely to have progression of valve
dysfunction and to require intervention during childhood.
Treatment of Bicuspid Aortic Valve
Balloon dilation or surgical repair
Treatment of bicuspid aortic valve is indicated if severe valve dysfunction develops and if symptoms
occur. Treatment consists of balloon dilation or surgical repair of stenotic valves. Regurgitant valves are
treated with surgery.
Ascending aorta or root replacement may be indicated if there is severe or progressive enlargement of
those structures.
More Information
The following English-language resource may be useful. Please note that The Manual is not responsible
for the content of this resource.
American Heart Association: Common Heart Defects: Provides overview of common congenital
heart defects for parents and caregivers
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 2/2
