Broad complex tachycardia—Part II - PMC
This article continues the discussion, started last week, on ventricular tachycardias and also examines
how to determine whether a broad complex tachycardia is ventricular or supraventricular in origin.
Ventricular tachycardias
Fascicular tachycardia
Fascicular tachycardia is uncommon and not usually associated with underlying structural heart
disease. It originates from the region of the posterior fascicle (or occasionally the anterior fascicle) of
the left bundle branch and is partly propagated by the His-Purkinje network. It therefore produces
QRS complexes of relatively short duration (0.11-0.14 s). Consequently, this arrhythmia is commonly
misdiagnosed as a supraventricular tachycardia.
The QRS complexes have a right bundle branch block pattern, often with a small Q wave rather than
primary R wave in lead V1 and a deep S wave in lead V6. When the tachycardia originates from the
posterior fascicle the frontal plane axis of the QRS complex is deviated to the left; when it originates
from the anterior fascicle, right axis deviation is seen.
 1/14

  
Right ventricular outflow tract tachycardia
This tachycardia originates from the right ventricular outflow tract, and the impulse spreads
inferiorly. The electrocardiogram typically shows right axis deviation, with a left bundle branch block
pattern. The tachycardia may be brief and self terminating or sustained, and it may be provoked by
catecholamine release, sudden changes in heart rate, and exercise. The tachycardia usually responds
to drugs such as β blockers or calcium antagonists. Occasionally the arrhythmia stops with adenosine
treatment and so may be misdiagnosed as a supraventricular tachycardia.
Torsades de pointes tachycardia
Torsades de pointes (“twisting of points”) is a type of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in which
the cardiac axis rotates over a sequence of 5-20 beats, changing from one direction to another and
back again. The QRS amplitude varies similarly, such that the complexes appear to twist around the
baseline. In sinus rhythm the QT interval is prolonged and prominent U waves may be seen.
Torsades de pointes may be drug induced or secondary to electrolyte disturbances
Torsades de pointes is not usually sustained, but it will recur unless the underlying cause is corrected.
Occasionally it may be prolonged or degenerate into ventricular fibrillation. It is associated with
conditions that prolong the QT interval.
Transient prolongation of the QT interval is often seen in the acute phase of myocardial infarction,
and this may lead to torsades de pointes. Ability to recognise torsades de pointes is important
because its management is different from the management of other ventricular tachycardias.
 2/14

  
Causes of torsades de pointes
Drugs Electrolyte disturbances
• Antiarrhythmic drugs: class Ia • Hypokalaemia
(disopyramide, procainamide, quinidine); class
III (amiodarone, bretylium, sotalol)
• Antibacterials: • Hypomagnesaemia
erythromycin, fluoquinolones, Congenital syndromes
trimethoprim • Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome
• Other drugs: terfenadine, cisapride, tricyclic • Romano-Ward syndrome
antidepressants, haloperidol, lithium,
phenothiazines, chloroquine, thioridazine
Other causes
• Ischaemic heart disease
• Myxoedema
• Bradycardia due to sick sinus
syndrome or complete heart block
• Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Open in a new tab
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia has the electrocardiographic characteristics of torsades de
pointes but in sinus rhythm the QT interval is normal. It is much less common than torsades de
pointes. If sustained, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia often leads to haemodynamic collapse. It
can occur in acute myocardial infarction and may deteriorate into ventricular fibrillation.
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia must be differentiated from atrial fibrillation with pre-excitation,
as both have the appearance of an irregular broad complex tachycardia with variable QRS
morphology (see last week's article).
 3/14

  
Differentiation between ventricular tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia with
bundle branch block
If the tachycardia has a right bundle branch block morphology (a predominantly positive QRS
complex in lead V1), a ventricular origin is suggested if there is:
QRS complex with duration >0.14 s
Axis deviation
A QS wave or predominantly negative complex in lead V6
Concordance throughout the chest leads, with all deflections positive
A single (R) or biphasic (QR or RS) R wave in lead V1
A triphasic R wave in lead V1, with the initial R wave taller than the secondary R wave
and an S wave that passes through the isoelectric line
If the tachycardia has a left bundle branch block morphology (a predominantly negative
deflection in lead V1), a ventricular origin is suggested if there is:
Axis deviation
QRS complexes with duration >0.16 s
A QS or predominantly negative deflection in lead V6
Concordance throughout the chest leads, with all deflections negative
An rS complex in lead V1
Broad complex tachycardias of supraventricular origin
In the presence of aberrant conduction or ventricular pre-excitation, any supraventricular tachycardia
may present as a broad complex tachycardia and mimic ventricular tachycardia.
Atrial tachycardia with aberrant conduction
Aberrant conduction is defined as conduction through the atrioventricular node with delay or block,
resulting in a broader QRS complex. Aberrant conduction usually manifests as left or right bundle
branch block, both of which have characteristic features. The bundle branch block may predate the
tachycardia, or it may be a rate related functional block, occurring when atrial impulses arrive too
rapidly for a bundle branch to conduct normally. When atrial fibrillation occurs with aberrant
 4/14

  
conduction and a rapid ventricular response, a totally irregular broad complex tachycardia is
produced.
The Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is discussed in more detail in an earlier article, on
junctional tachycardias
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Broad complex tachycardias may also occur in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, either as an
antidromic atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia or in association with atrial flutter or fibrillation.
Antidromic atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia
In this relatively uncommon tachycardia the impulse is conducted from the atria to the ventricles via
the accessory pathway. The resulting tachycardia has broad, bizarre QRS complexes.
Atrial fibrillation
In patients without an accessory pathway the atrioventricular node protects the ventricles from the
rapid atrial activity that occurs during atrial fibrillation. In the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome the
atrial impulses are conducted down the accessory pathway, which may allow rapid conduction and
consequently very fast ventricular rates.
Drugs that block the atrioventricular node—such as digoxin, verapamil, and adenosine
—should be avoided as they can produce an extremely rapid ventricular response
The impulses conducted via the accessory pathway produce broad QRS complexes. Occasionally an
impulse will be conducted via the atrioventricular node and produce a normal QRS complex or a
fusion beat. The result is a completely irregular and often rapid broad complex tachycardia with a
fairly constant QRS pattern, except for occasional normal complexes and fusion beats.
Differentiating between ventricular and supraventricular origin
 5/14

  
Clinical presentation
Age is a useful factor in determining the origin of a broad complex tachycardia: a tachycardia in
patients aged over 35 years is more likely to be ventricular in origin. A history that includes ischaemic
heart disease or congestive cardiac failure is 90% predictive of ventricular tachycardia.
Danger of misdiagnosis
The safest option is to regard a broad complex tachycardia of uncertain origin as
ventricular tachycardia unless good evidence suggests a supraventricular origin
If a ventricular tachycardia is wrongly treated as supraventricular tachycardia, the
consequences may be extremely serious
Giving verapamil to a patient with ventricular tachycardia may result in hypotension,
acceleration of the tachycardia, and death
The symptoms associated with broad complex tachycardia depend on the haemodynamic
consequences of the arrhythmia—that is, they relate to the heart rate and the underlying cardiac
reserve rather than to the origin of the arrhythmia. It is wrong to assume that a patient with
ventricular tachycardia will inevitably be in a state of collapse; some patients look well but present
with dizziness, palpitations, syncope, chest pain, or heart failure. In contrast, a supraventricular
tachycardia may cause collapse in a patient with underlying poor ventricular function.
Clinical evidence of atrioventricular dissociation—that is, “cannon” waves in the jugular venous pulse
or variable intensity of the first heart sound—indicates a diagnosis of a ventricular tachycardia The
absence of these findings, however, does not exclude the diagnosis.
Electrocardiographic differences
Direct evidence of independent P wave activity is highly suggestive of ventricular tachycardia, as is
the presence of fusion beats or captured beats. The duration of QRS complexes is also a key
differentiating feature: those of >0.14 s generally indicate a ventricular origin. Concordance
throughout the chest leads also indicates ventricular tachycardia.
 6/14

  
In ventricular tachycardia the rhythm is regular or almost regular; if the rhythm is
obviously irregular the most likely diagnosis is atrial fibrillation with either aberrant
conduction or pre-excitation
A previous electrocardiogram may give valuable information. Evidence of a myocardial infarction
increases the likelihood of ventricular tachycardia, and if the mean frontal plane axis changes during
the tachycardia (especially if the change is >40° to the left or right) this points to a ventricular origin.
Adenosine can also be used to block conduction temporarily through the
atrioventricular node to ascertain the origin of a broad complex tachycardia, but failure
to stop the tachycardia does not necessarily indicate a ventricular origin
Ventricular tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia with bundle branch block may produce
similar electrocardiograms. If a previous electrocardiogram shows a bundle branch block pattern
during sinus rhythm that is similar to or identical with that during the tachycardia, the origin of the
tachycardia is likely to be supraventricular. But if the QRS morphology changes during the
tachycardia, a ventricular origin is indicated.
The emergency management of a broad complex tachycardia depends on the wellbeing of the patient
and the origin of the arrhythmia. Vagal stimulation—for example, carotid sinus massage or the
Valsalva manoeuvre—does not usually affect a ventricular tachycardia but may affect arrhythmias of
supraventricular origin. By transiently slowing or blocking conduction through the atrioventricular
node, an atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia or atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia may
be terminated. In atrial flutter transient block may reveal the underlying flutter waves.