=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:16.475912",
  "file_size_bytes": 283328,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Brugada syndrome overview
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com)
Overview
Brugada syndrome is a genetic disease that is characterized by abnormal electrocardiogram (EKG)
findings and an increased risk of sudden cardiac death in young adults, and occasionally in
children and infants. Brugada syndrome is a condition that causes a disruption of the heart's
normal rhythm. Specifically, this disorder can lead to uncoordinated electrical activity in the
heart's lower chambers (ventricles), an abnormality called ventricular arrhythmia. If untreated, the
irregular heartbeats can cause fainting (syncope), seizures, difficulty breathing, or sudden death.
These complications typically occur when an affected person is resting or asleep.
Historical Perspective
Brugada syndorme was potentially first seen on EKG in survivors of cardiac arrest in 1989, but it
was not until 1992 that the Brugada brothers recognized it as a distinct clinical entity which could
cause sudden death by ventricular fibrillation.
Classification
There are three electrocardiographic patterns associated with Brugada syndrome: Type I, Type II
and Type III. The diagnosis of Brugada syndrome is based upon the presence of Type I EKG
changes. Patients with Type II or Type III Brugada patterns can convert to a Type I Brugada
pattern following the administration of sodium channel blockers such as ajmaline and flecainide.
Pathophysiology
Approximately 20% of persons with Brugada syndome have a mutation in the gene SCN5A. This
gene encodes for the sodium ion channel. The mutation is inherited in an autosomal dominant
pattern, and is more commonly seen in males. Brugada syndrome has also been shown to result
from defects in a calcium channel.
Differentiating Brugada syndrome from other Diseases
Brugada syndrome should be differentiated from other cardiac disorders, electrolyte disturbances,
and drug intoxication syndromes. The condition which most similarly presents to Brugada
syndrome is arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, as they both cause sudden cardiac death
in children. Brugada syndrome can be differentiated from arrhythmogenic right ventricular
dysplasia by the genetic counterpart of SCN5A, the lack of structural abnormalities within the
heart, the association with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia during sleep, and EKG changes
that are enhanced by vagotonic agents.
Epidemiology and Demographics
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Brugada_syndrome_overview 1/4
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc
Insofar as Brugada syndrome is a relatively newly recognized syndrome, its incidence and
prevalence continues to increase. Brugada syndrome is quite common in Southeast Asia where it is
endemic, and affects 500 out of every 100,000 individuals. It is the second leading cause of death
after car accidents among young people in these countries. It has been estimated that Brugada
syndrome accounts for 4% of all sudden cardiac deaths and 20% of sudden cardiac deaths among
patients with structurally normal hearts. It is 8-10 times more common in men.
Risk Factors
The EKG changes of Brugada syndrome can vary over time, depending on the autonomic balance
and the administration of antiarrhythmic drugs. Adrenergic stimulation decreases the ST segment
elevation, while vagal stimulation worsens it. During sleep, there is heightened vagal tone, and the
pattern may be exacerbated at that time (as is the risk of sudden cardiac death at that time). The
administration of class Ia, Ic and III drugs increases the ST segment elevation, as does fever. The
impact of exercise depends upon when the EKG is obtained: during exercise the ST segment
elevation may decrease but may increase later after exercise when the body temperature has risen.
Similar to early repolarization variant, when the heart rate decreases, the ST segment elevation
increases and when the heart rate increases the ST segment elevation decreases. While Brugada
syndrome is often associated with polymorphic VT which may be self terminating, in the presence
of autonomic imbalance, hypokalemia, fever or exacerbating drugs sustained ventricular
fibrillation and sudden cardiac death may result.[1]
Screening
Relatives of patients with Brugada syndrome can be screened for the syndrome by obtaining an
EKG, although the diagnostic pattern may be concealed. Genetic testing can also be used to
support the diagnosis of Brugada syndrome and to detect relatives at risk.[1] Unfortunately, despite
the association of the Brugada syndrome with the SCN5A genotype, there is unfortunately no
association between the results of genetic testing and clinical prognosis.
Natural History, Complications and Prognosis
Brugada syndrome usually becomes apparent in adulthood, although it may present in infants and
children as sudden cardiac death. The mean age of sudden death in patients with Brugada
syndrome is 40 years old. The Brugada patient may develop atrial arrhythmias and abnormalities
in atrial conduction, and these abnormalities are associated with inducibility of ventricular
fibrillation. Implantation of a cardiac defibrillator AICD can improve prognosis for some.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic Criteria
The diagnosis of brugada syndrome is based upon electrocardiographic and clinical criteria. Only
the Type I Brugada pattern qualifies as part of the diagnostic criteria for Brugada syndrome. Other
rhythm abnormalities and family history are also taken into account when making the diagnosis of
Brugada syndrome.
History and Symptoms
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Brugada_syndrome_overview 2/4
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc
Patients with Brugada syndrome will sometimes have a family history of sudden cardiac death and
a personal history of of arrhythmias. If patients are symptomatic they often have symptoms of
syncope, seizures, agonal breathing, difficulty breathing, and patients may even present with
sudden death. These symptoms most often come on either at rest or during sleep.
Physical Examination
Insofar as Brugada syndrome is not associated with any structural heart disease, there are
generally no abnormalities on physical examination. Vagal maneuvers such as carotid sinus
massage may increase vagal tone and may unmask the presence of a Type I Brugada pattern. In a
patient who has experienced recent symptoms such as syncope, it is important to check the
temperature in so far as fever may trigger a self terminating or sustained episode of ventricular
tachycardia / ventricular fibrillation. The presence of fever is also a target of antipyretic therapy.
Laboratory Findings
Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia can both trigger either sustained or nonsustained episodes of
ventricular tachycardia / ventricular fibrillation and serum electrolytes should therefore be
checked. Both alcohol and cocaine intoxication can be associated with either sustained or
nonsustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation and a toxicology screen
should be ordered if there is a clinical suspicion. Likewise, tricyclic antidepressants can be
associated with exacerbations of the syndrome, and levels of these agents should also be checked if
there is a clinical suspicion.
Electrocardiogram
There are three electrocardiographic patterns associated with Brugada syndrome: Type I, Type II
and Type III. The diagnosis of Brugada syndrome is based upon the presence of Type I EKG
changes. Patients with Type II or Type III Brugada patterns can convert to a Type I Brugada
pattern following the administration of sodium channel blockers such as ajmaline and flecainide.
Type 1 Brugada syndrome may always be present on the EKG, or it may be elicited by the
administration of particular drugs (e.g., Class IC antiarrythmic drugs that blocks sodium channels
such as ajmaline, flecainide) or it may be unmasked by various triggers or risk factors.
Chest X Ray
Insofar as Brugada syndrome is not associated with structural abnormalities of the heart, there are
no associated abnormalities on the chest x-ray.
Echocardiography or Ultrasound
There is ongoing controversy as to whether there are structural abnormalities among patients with
Brugada syndrome. There was one small study of 11 patients with Brugada syndrome that
demonstrated a rapid swinging motion shifting towards the right ventricle of the basal segment of
the intraventricular septum and early systole in 73% (8/11) of patients with Brugada syndrome.
None of the control patients demonstrated this abnormality.[2]
Electrophysiologic Studies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Brugada_syndrome_overview 3/4
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Brugada syndrome overview - wikidoc
Patients who are inducible at the time electrophysiologic study have an eightfold increased risk of
aborted sudden cardiac death compared with those patients who are not inducible.[3] Some groups
have advocated that programmed electrical stimulation (PES) be performed to induce ventricular
fibrillation for risk assessment in Brugada patients [4][5] Other groups have not reproduced the
predictive value of these tests,[6][7] so the value of programmed electrical stimulation (PES) and
inducibility remains controversial.
Genetic Testing
Despite the association of the Brugada syndrome with the SCN5A genotype, there is unfortunately
no association between the results of genetic testing and clinical prognosis. Genetic testing can be
used to support the diagnosis of Brugada syndrome and to detect relatives at risk.[1]
Treatment
Implantation of a cardiac defibrillator is the only proven method of treatment in Brugada
syndrome.Patients with aborted sudden cardiac death are at high risk for recurrence and should
undergo AICD implantation, and do not require an electrophysiologic study to assess inducibility.
Patients with symptoms (either syncope, seizures or nocturnal agonal respirations) should undergo
implantation of a defibrillator if no other cause of their symptoms can be identified. Asymptomatic
patients should undergo electrophysiologic testing, and if VT / VF can be induced, they should
undergo implantation of an ICD. Asymptomatic patients who cannot be induced should followed-
up closely. Patients who are asymptomatic with no family history of Brugada syndrome can be
followed-up closely.
Drugs to Avoid
There are certain drugs that should be avoided in patients with Brugada syndrome. These drugs
include ajmaline, flecainide, pilsicainide, procainamide, and propafenone. These drugs are all
sodium blocking antiarrhythmics which are either in the IA class or IC class.
Drugs to Preferably Avoid
Drugs which are not contraindicated in Brugada syndrome, but which should be avoided, are
amiodarone, cibenzoline, disopyramide, lidocaine, propanolol, and verapamil. These agents are all
antiarrhythmics. Topical lidocaine used for anesthesia is thought to be safe when used in persons
with Brugada syndrome.
References
Template:WH Template:WS CME Category::Cardiology
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Brugada_syndrome_overview 4/4
