=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:44.337756",
  "file_size_bytes": 1466946,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Cardiac Catheterization
By Thomas Cascino, MD, MSc, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023 | Modified Jul 2024
Cardiac catheterization is the passage of a catheter through peripheral arteries
or veins into cardiac chambers, the pulmonary artery, and coronary arteries
and veins.
Cardiac catheterization can be used to do various tests, including
Angiography
Detection and quantification of shunts
Endomyocardial biopsy
Intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS)
Measurement of cardiac output (CO)
Measurements of myocardial metabolism
These tests define coronary artery anatomy, cardiac anatomy, cardiac function, and pulmonary arterial
hemodynamics to establish diagnoses and help clinicians select treatment.
Cardiac catheterization is also the basis for several therapeutic interventions (see Percutaneous
coronary intervention in Treatment of Coronary Artery Disease).
Procedure for Cardiac Catheterization
Many but not all preprocedure protocols require patients to fast for 4 to 6 hours before cardiac
catheterization. Most patients do not require overnight hospitalization unless a therapeutic intervention
is also done.
Left heart catheterization
Left heart catheterization is most commonly used to assess
Coronary artery anatomy and presence of coronary artery disease
Left heart catheterization is also used to assess
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 1/14
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Aortic blood pressure
Aortic valve function
Left ventricular pressure and function
Mitral valve function
Systemic vascular resistance
Left heart catheterization is done via femoral, subclavian, radial, or brachial artery puncture, with a
catheter passed into the coronary artery ostia and/or across the aortic valve into the left ventricle (LV).
Catheterization of the left atrium (LA) and LV is occasionally done using transseptal perforation during
right heart catheterization.
Right heart catheterization
Right heart catheterization is commonly used to measure
Right atrial pressure
Right ventricular pressure
Pulmonary artery pressure
Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP—see figure Diagram of the Cardiac Cycle)
The most frequent indications for right heart catheterization are to assess hemodynamics, diagnose
pulmonary hypertension, guide therapy, and assess need for cardiac transplantation or mechanical
cardiac support (eg, a ventricular assist device).
PAOP approximates left atrial and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. In seriously ill patients, PAOP
helps assess volume status and, with simultaneous measurements of cardiac output, can help guide
therapy.
Right heart catheterization is also useful for assessing cardiac filling pressures, pulmonary vascular
resistance, tricuspid or pulmonic valve function, intracardiac shunts, and right ventricular pressure.
Right heart pressure measurements may help in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, constrictive
pericarditis, and cardiac tamponade when noninvasive testing is nondiagnostic, and it is an essential
part of the assessment for cardiac transplantation or mechanical cardiac support (eg, use of a
ventricular assist device).
The procedure is done via femoral, subclavian, internal jugular, or antecubital vein puncture. A catheter
is passed into the right atrium, through the tricuspid valve, into the right ventricle, and across the
pulmonary valve into the pulmonary artery.
Selective catheterization of the coronary sinus can also be done.
Hemodynamic assessment via right heart catheterization during exercise is increasingly being done as
part of the workup for dyspnea of uncertain etiology. The test can be done at the same time as
cardiopulmonary exercise testing, called invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing. This is considered
the standard for diagnosis of cardiac limitation to exercise but is currently available at relatively few
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 2/14
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
centers. An exercise right heart catheterization should be considered in patients at intermediate pretest
probability for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction if the diagnosis is uncertain after an initial
evaluation. An increase in the PAOP > 25 mm Hg confirms the diagnosis when patients have signs and
symptoms of heart failure irrespective of left ventricular ejection fraction.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 3/14
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagram of the Cardiac Cycle, Showing Pressure Curves of the Cardiac
Chambers, Heart Sounds, Jugular Pulse Wave, and the ECG
The phases of the cardiac cycle are atrial systole (a), isometric contraction (b), maximal ejection
(c), reduced ejection (d), protodiastolic phase (e), isometric relaxation (f), rapid inflow (g), and
diastasis, or slow LV filling (h). For illustrative purposes, time intervals between valvular events
have been modified, and the z point has been prolonged.
In the jugular venous pulse tracing, the A wave represents atrial contraction at end-diastole, C
wave is the carotid artery impulse or bulging of the tricuspid valve into the right atrium in early
systole, V wave is the increase in pressure and volume of right atrial filling in late systole and
early diastole, X and X' descents represent movement of the lower part of the right atrium
toward the ventricle with X' at end-systole, and the Y descent is tricuspid valve opening and
ventricular filling in diastole.
AO = aortic valve opening; AC = aortic valve closing; LV = left ventricle; LA = left atrium; RV = right
ventricle; RA = right atrium; MO = mitral valve opening.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 4/14
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 5/14
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Specific Tests During Cardiac Catheterization
Angiography
Injection of radiopaque contrast agent into coronary or pulmonary arteries, the aorta, and cardiac
chambers is useful in certain circumstances. Digital subtraction angiography is used for nonmoving
arteries and for chamber cineangiography.
Coronary angiography via left heart catheterization is used to evaluate coronary artery anatomy in
various clinical situations, as in patients with suspected coronary atherosclerotic or congenital disease,
valvular disorders before valvular replacement, or unexplained heart failure.
Coronary Angiography
IMAGE
ASTIER/BSIP/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Pulmonary angiography via right heart catheterization can be used to diagnose pulmonary embolism.
Intraluminal filling defects or arterial cutoffs are diagnostic. Radiopaque contrast agent is usually
selectively injected into one or both pulmonary arteries and their segments. Computed tomographic
pulmonary angiography (CTPA) has largely replaced right heart catheterization for diagnosis of acute
pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary angiography via right heart catheterization remains commonly used
to determine a management plan for suspected chronic thromboembolic disease.
Aortic angiography via left heart catheterization is used to assess aortic regurgitation, coarctation,
patent ductus arteriosus, and dissection.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 6/14
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Ventriculography (LV Gram)
IMAGE
PETER MENZEL/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Ventriculography is used to visualize ventricular wall motion and ventricular outflow tracts, including
subvalvular, valvular, and supravalvular regions. It is also used to estimate severity of mitral valve
regurgitation and determine its pathophysiology. After left ventricular mass and volume are determined
from single planar or biplanar ventricular angiograms, end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes and
ejection fraction can be calculated.
Coronary artery flow measurements
Coronary angiography shows the presence and degree of stenosis but not the functional significance of
the lesion (ie, how much blood flows across the stenosis) or whether a specific lesion is likely to be the
cause of symptoms.
Extremely thin guidewires with pressure sensors or Doppler flow sensors are available. Data from these
sensors can be used to estimate coronary artery blood flow, which is expressed as fractional flow
reserve (FFR). FFR is the ratio of maximal flow through the stenotic area to normal maximal flow
obtained during hyperemia (most commonly with adenosine); an FFR of < 0.75 to 0.8 is considered
abnormal. Newer techniques of measuring coronary blood flow, including instantaneous wave-free ratio
(iFR) and diastolic hyperemia-free ratio (DFR), have been developed. These techniques have the
advantage of not requiring hyperemia. Both iFR and DFR measure gradients across a stenosis during a
period in diastole; an iFR or DFR of ≤ 0.89 is considered abnormal (1, 2).
These flow estimates correlate well with the need for intervention and long-term outcome; patients with
lesions with FFR > 0.8, iFR > 0.89, or DFR > 0.89 do not seem to benefit from placement of a stent. These
flow measurements are most useful with intermediate lesions (40 to 70% stenosis) and with multiple
lesions (to identify those that are clinically most significant).
Intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS)
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 7/14
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Miniature ultrasound transducers on the end of coronary artery catheters can produce images of
coronary vessel lumina and walls and delineate blood flow. Intravascular ultrasonography is being
increasingly used at the same time as coronary angiography in several clinical situations, including to
guide optimal stent placement during percutaneous coronary intervention, detect cardiac allograft
vasculopathy after heart transplantation, and identify coronary artery dissections.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
Optical coherence tomography is an optical analog of intracoronary ultrasound imaging that measures
the amplitude of backscattered light to determine the temperature of coronary plaques and can help
determine whether lesions are at high risk of future rupture (leading to acute coronary syndromes).
Unlike in IVUS, injection of contrast is required to obtain images. The indications and appropriate use
for OCT versus IVUS are currently uncertain.
Tests for cardiac shunts
Measuring blood oxygen content at successive levels in the heart and great vessels can help determine
the presence, direction, and volume of central shunts. The maximal normal difference in oxygen
content between structures is as follows:
The pulmonary artery and right ventricle: 0.5 mL/dL (0.5 vol%)
The right ventricle and right atrium: 0.9 mL/dL (0.9 vol%)
The right atrium and superior vena cava: 1.9 mL/dL (1.9 vol%)
If the blood oxygen content in a chamber exceeds that of the more proximal chamber by more than
these values, a left-to-right shunt at that level is probable. Right-to-left shunts are strongly suspected
when LA, LV, or arterial oxygen saturation is low (≤ 92%) and does not improve when pure oxygen
(fractional inspirational O2 = 1.0) is given. Left heart or arterial desaturation plus increased oxygen
content in blood samples drawn beyond the shunt site on the right side of circulation suggests a
bidirectional shunt.
Measurement of cardiac output and flow
Cardiac output (CO) is the volume of blood ejected by the heart per minute (normal at rest: 4 to 8
L/minute). Techniques (see table Cardiac Output Equations) used to calculate CO include
Fick cardiac output technique
Indicator-dilution technique
Thermodilution technique
TABLE
Cardiac Output Equations
Fick technique
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 8/14
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Numerator is oxygen consumption (O2 absorbed by lungs in mL/minute).
Indicator-dilution technique
Denominator is the sum of contrast agent concentrations (C) at each time interval
(t).
Thermodilution technique
TB – TI is the difference between body and injectate temperatures; injectate is
usually dextrose or saline. Denominator is the sum of changes in temperature at
each time interval (t).
SaO2 = arterial oxygen saturation (%); SvO2 = mixed venous oxygen saturation (%),
measured in the pulmonary artery.
With the Fick technique, CO is proportional to oxygen consumption divided by arteriovenous oxygen
difference.
Dilution techniques rely on the assumption that after an indicator is injected into the circulation, it
appears and disappears proportionately to CO.
2
Usually, CO is expressed in relation to body surface area (BSA) as the cardiac index (CI) in L/minute/m
(ie, CI = CO/BSA—see table Normal Values for Cardiac Index and Related Measures). BSA is calculated
using DuBois height (ht)–weight (wt) equation:
TABLE
Normal Values for Cardiac Index and Related Measurements
Measurement Normal Value SD
2
Oxygen uptake 143 mL/minute/m * 14.3
Arteriovenous oxygen
4.1 dL 0.6
difference
2
Cardiac index 3.5 L/minute/m 0.7
2
Stroke index 46 mL/beat/m 8.1
-5
Total systemic resistance 1130 dynes-second-cm 178
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 9/14
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Measurement Normal Value SD
Total pulmonary
-5
205 dynes-second-cm 51
resistance
Pulmonary arteriolar
-5
67 dynes-second-cm 23
resistance
* Varies with body mass index.
SD = standard deviation.
Adapted from Barratt-Boyes BG, Wood EH: Cardiac output and related measurements and
pressure values in the right heart and associated vessels, together with an analysis of the
hemodynamic response to the inhalation of high oxygen mixtures in healthy subjects.
Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine 51:72–90, 1958.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Cardiac Output MultiCalc
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Cardiac Output
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Body Surface Area (Du Bois Method)
Endomyocardial biopsy
Endomyocardial biopsy helps assess transplant rejection and myocardial disorders due to infection or
infiltrative diseases. The biopsy catheter (bioptome) can be passed into either ventricle, usually the
right. Three to 5 samples of myocardial tissue are removed from the septal endocardium. The main
complication of endomyocardial biopsy, cardiac perforation, occurs in 0.3 to 0.5% of patients; it may
cause hemopericardium leading to cardiac tamponade. Injury to the tricuspid valve and supporting
chordae may also occur and can lead to tricuspid regurgitation.
Tests during cardiac catheterization references
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 10/14
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Gotberg M, Christiansen EH, Gudmundsdottir IJ, et al: Instantaneous wave-free ratio versus
fractional flow reserve to guide PCI. New Engl J Med 376:1813–1823, 2017. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa1616540
2. Johnson NP, Li W, Chen X, et al: Diastolic pressure ratio: new approach and validation vs. the
instantaneous wave-free ratio. Eur Heart J 40:2585–2594, 2019.
Contraindications to Cardiac Catheterization
Relative contraindications to cardiac catheterization include
Acute kidney injury
Chronic kidney disease
Coagulopathy
Fever
Radiopaque contrast agent allergies in patients who have not been appropriately
premedicated
Systemic infection
Uncontrolled arrhythmia
Uncontrolled hypertension
Uncompensated heart failure
Relative contraindications balance the urgency of the procedure (eg, in an acute myocardial infarction vs
an elective case) and the severity of the contraindicating disorder. Periprocedural management of
anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs is individualized based on the type of procedure (ie, arterial vs
venous access), the urgency of the procedure, the indication for the drug, and the patient's risk of
bleeding. Catheterization laboratories frequently have policies for the periprocedural management of
these drugs.
Complications of Cardiac Catheterization
The incidence of complications after cardiac catheterizations ranges from 0.8 to 8%, depending on
patient factors, technical factors, and the experience of the operator. Patient factors that increase risk of
complications include
Chronic kidney disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Diabetes
Heart failure
Increasing age
Peripheral arterial disease
Valvular heart disease
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 11/14
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Most complications are minor and can be easily treated. Serious complications (eg, cardiac arrest,
anaphylactic reactions, shock, seizures, renal toxicity) are rare. Mortality rate is 0.1 to 0.2%. Myocardial
infarction (0.1%) and stroke (0.1%) may result in significant morbidity. Incidence of stroke is higher in
patients > 80 years.
In general, complications involve
The contrast agent
Effects of the catheter
The access site
Contrast agent complications
Injection of radiopaque contrast agent produces a transient sense of warmth throughout the body in
many patients. Tachycardia, a slight fall in systemic pressure, an increase in cardiac output, nausea,
vomiting, and coughing may occur. Rarely, bradycardia occurs when a large amount of a contrast agent
is injected; asking the patient to cough often restores normal rhythm.
More serious reactions (see also Radiographic Contrast Agents and Contrast Reactions) include
Allergic-type contrast reactions
Contrast-induced kidney injury
Allergic-type reactions to radiographic contrast include urticaria and conjunctivitis, which usually
respond to diphenhydramine 50 mg IV. Anaphylaxis and anaphylactoid reactions with bronchospasm,
laryngeal edema, and dyspnea are rare reactions with an approximate frequency of about 1/5000 tests
(1). These reactions should be treated immediately with epinephrine. Patients with a history of allergic
reaction to contrast may be premedicated with oral prednisone (or parenteral hydrocortisone if the
study is urgent) and diphenhydramine.
Contrast-induced kidney injury is defined as impairment of renal function (either a 25% increase in
serum creatinine from baseline or a 0.5 mg/dL [44 micromole/L] increase in absolute value) within 24 to
48 hours of IV contrast administration judged to be caused by contrast rather than alternative causes.
For patients at risk, use of lowest possible dose of low-osmolar or iso-osmolar contrast, avoidance of
multiple contrast studies within a short period of time, and infusion of a total 10 to 15 mL/kg normal
saline IV beginning 4 to 6 hours before angiography and 6 to 12 hours afterward reduces this risk
substantially. In patients at risk of impaired renal function, assess serum creatinine 48 hours after
injection of contrast.
Contrast agent complications reference
1. Wang CL, Cohan RH, Ellis JH, et al: Frequency, outcome, and appropriateness of treatment of
nonionic iodinated contrast media reactions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 191:409–415, 2008. doi:
10.2214/AJR.07.3421
Catheter-related complications
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 12/14
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
If the catheter tip contacts the ventricular endocardium, ventricular arrhythmias commonly occur, but
ventricular fibrillation is rare. If it occurs, direct current cardioversion (DC cardioversion) is administered
immediately.
Disruption of an atherosclerotic plaque by the catheter can release a shower of atheroemboli. Emboli
from the aorta may cause stroke or nephropathy. Emboli from proximal to distal coronary arteries may
cause myocardial infarction.
Coronary artery dissection is also possible.
Access site complications
Access site complications include
Bleeding
Hematoma
Pseudoaneurysm
Arteriovenous (AV) fistula
Limb ischemia
Bleeding from the access site may occur and usually resolves with compression. Mild bruises and small
hematomas are common and do not require specific investigation or treatment.
A large or enlarging lump should be investigated using ultrasonography to distinguish hematoma from
pseudoaneurysm. A bruit at the site (with or without pain) suggests an AV fistula, which can be
diagnosed using ultrasonography. Hematomas usually resolve with time and do not require specific
therapy. Pseudoaneurysms and AV fistulas usually resolve with compression; those that persist may
require surgical repair.
Radial artery access is in general more comfortable for the patient and carries a much lower risk of
hematoma or pseudoaneurysm or AV fistula formation when compared with femoral artery access.
More Information
The following English-language resources may be useful. Please note that THE MANUAL is not
responsible for the content of these resources.
ACR Manual on Contrast Media: 2021 ACR Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media provides a
guide for safe and effective use of contrast media
Bashore TM, Balter S, Barac A, et al. 2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation/Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions expert consensus document on cardiac
catheterization laboratory standards update: A report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation Task Force on Expert Consensus documents developed in collaboration with the
Society of Thoracic Surgeons and Society for Vascular Medicine. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2012;59(24):2221-2305. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.010
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 13/14
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 14:01 Cardiac Catheterization - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation/Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions expert consensus document on cardiac catheterization laboratory standards update:
A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Expert Consensus
documents developed in collaboration with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons and Society for
Vascular Medicine: Provides the most recent consensus opinions on standards for cardiac
catheterization labs
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiovascular-tests-and-procedures/cardiac-catheterization 14/14
