Cardiac Auscultation
Auscultation of the heart requires excellent hearing ,experience, and the ability to distinguish subtle
differences in pitch and timing. Hearing-impaired health care professionals can use amplified
stethoscopes. High-pitched sounds are best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. Low-pitched
sounds are best heard with the bell. Very little pressure should be exerted when using the bell.
Excessive pressure converts the underlying skin into a diaphragm and eliminates very low-pitched
sounds.
The entire precordium is examined systematically, typically beginning over the apical impulse with the
patient in the left lateral decubitus position (1). The patient rolls supine, and auscultation continues at
the lower left sternal border, proceeds cephalad with auscultation of each interspace, then caudad from
the right upper sternal border. The clinician also listens over the left axilla and above the clavicles. The
patient sits upright for auscultation of the back, then leans forward to aid auscultation of aortic and
pulmonic diastolic murmurs or pericardial friction rub.
Major auscultatory findings include:
Heart sounds
Gallops
Murmurs
Rubs
Heart sounds are brief, transient sounds produced by valve opening and closure; they are divided into
systolic and diastolic sounds.
Gallops are diastolic sounds (third heart sound [S3] and fourth heart sound [S4]) caused by ventricular
filling; a gallop is usually, but not always, abnormal.
Murmurs are produced by blood flow turbulence and are more prolonged than heart sounds; they may
be systolic, diastolic, or continuous. They are graded by intensity and are described by their location and
when they occur within the cardiac cycle. Systolic murmurs are graded in intensity on a scale of 1 to 6
(see table Systolic Heart Murmur Intensity), while diastolic murmurs are graded on a scale of 1 to 4.
TABLE
Systolic Heart Murmur Intensity
 1/15

  
Grade Description
1 Barely audible
2 Soft but easily heard
Loud, without a thrill (a palpable buzzing
3
sensation)
4 Loud, with a thrill
Loud, audible with minimal contact
5
between stethoscope and chest
Loud, audible with no contact between
6
stethoscope and chest
Rubs are high-pitched, scratchy sounds often with 2 or 3 separate components, which may vary
according to body position; during tachycardia, the sound may be almost continuous.
The clinician focuses attention sequentially on each phase of the cardiac cycle, noting each heart sound
and murmur. Intensity, pitch, duration, and timing of the sounds and the intervals between them are
analyzed, often providing an accurate diagnosis. Historically, a diagram of the major auscultatory and
palpatory findings of the precordium was drawn in the patient’s chart each time the patient’s
cardiovascular system was examined (see figure Diagram of Physical Findings). With such diagrams,
findings from each examination could be compared. Subsequent examination findings should be
interpreted in the context of available imaging results (including echocardiogram and cardiac MRI) to
diagnose and monitor valvular and other abnormalities.
 2/15

  
Diagram of Physical Findings in a Patient With Aortic Stenosis and Mitral
Regurgitation
Murmur, character, intensity, and radiation are depicted. Sound of pulmonic closure exceeds
that of aortic closure. Left ventricular (LV) thrust and right ventricular (RV) lift (heavy arrows) are
identified. A fourth heart sound (S ) and systolic thrill (T ) are present. a = aortic closure sound; p
4 S
= pulmonic closure sound; S = first heart sound; S = second heart sound; 3/6 = grade of
1 2
crescendo-diminuendo murmur (radiates to both sides of neck); 2/6 =grade of pansystolic apical
crescendo murmur; 1+ = mild precordial lift of RV hypertrophy (arrow shows direction of lift); 2
+= moderate LV thrust (arrow shows direction of thrust).
Systolic heart sounds
Systolic sounds include the following:
First heart sound (S1)
Clicks
S1 and the second heart sound (S2, a diastolic heart sound) are normal components of the cardiac cycle,
the familiar “lub-dub” sounds.
S1 occurs just after the beginning of systole and is predominantly due to mitral closure but may also
include tricuspid closure components. It is often split and has a high pitch. S1 is loud in mitral stenosis.
 3/15

  
It may be soft or absent in mitral regurgitation due to valve leaflet sclerosis and rigidity but is often
distinctly heard in mitral regurgitation due to myxomatous degeneration of the mitral apparatus or due
to ventricular myocardial abnormality (eg, papillary muscle dysfunction, ventricular dilation). S1 is often
soft or absent in first-degree atrioventricular block as the atrioventricular valve leaflets (mitral and
tricuspid) drift to a nearly closed position prior to ventricular systole.
Clicks occur only during systole; they are distinguished from S1 and S2 by their higher pitch and briefer
duration. Some clicks occur at different times during systole as hemodynamics change. Clicks may be
single or multiple.
Clicks in congenital aortic stenosis or pulmonic stenosis are thought to result from abnormal ventricular
wall tension. These clicks occur early in systole (very near S1) and are not affected by hemodynamic
changes. Similar clicks occur in severe pulmonary hypertension. Clicks in mitral valve prolapse or
tricuspid valve prolapse, typically occurring in mid to late systole, are thought to result from abnormal
tension on redundant and elongated chordae tendineae or valve leaflets.
Clicks due to myxomatous degeneration of valves may occur any time during systole but move toward
S1 during maneuvers that transiently decrease ventricular filling volume (eg, standing, Valsalva
maneuver). If ventricular filling volume is increased (eg, by lying supine), clicks move toward S2,
particularly in mitral valve prolapse. For unknown reasons, characteristics of the clicks may vary greatly
between examinations, and clicks may come and go.
Systolic Heart Sounds
Split First Heart Sound
S1 splitting is normal in many patients and is thought to be caused by mitral valve closure followed by an
aortic ejection sound.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Pulmonary Ejection Click
High pulmonary artery pressures may dilate the pulmonary artery, stretching the valve ring and causing a
click when taut cusps open rapidly.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Split Second Heart Sound
 4/15

  
Sound is that of S1–S2 with expiration (“out”) and S1–A2–P2 with inspiration (“in”). S2 splits with inspiration
because intrathoracic pressure decreases, drawing more blood into the right ventricle and postponing
pulmonic valve closure.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
Diastolic heart sounds
Diastolic sounds include the following:
Second, third, and fourth heart sounds (S2, S3, and S4)
Diastolic knocks
Mitral valve sounds
Unlike systolic sounds, diastolic sounds are low-pitched; they are softer in intensity and longer in
duration. Except for S2, these sounds are usually abnormal in adults, although an S3 may be physiologic
up to age 40 years and during pregnancy.
S2 occurs at the beginning of diastole, and includes aortic and pulmonic valve closure. Normally, aortic
valve closure (A2) precedes pulmonic valve closure (P2), with a greater delay in P2 during inspiration due
to increased right ventricular filling. When P2 is delayed enough to be audibly distinct from A2, it
produces splitting of S2. The change in this delay with respiration causes physiologic splitting of S2,
with the split typically audible only during inspiration.
In some conditions in which pulmonic valve closure is delayed (eg, complete right bundle branch block,
pulmonic valve stenosis), S2 is widely split but still varies with the respiratory cycle. With an atrial septal
defect of the common secundum type, P2 is delayed but does not vary with respiration, resulting in a
wide fixed split of S2. Left-to-right shunts with normal right ventricular volume (eg, ventricular septal
defects) do not cause fixed splitting.
If aortic valve closure is late (as in left bundle branch block or aortic stenosis), S2 may split in expiration
and be single in inspiration when the delayed P2 occurs at the same time as the delayed A2; this is
known as paradoxical splitting. Finally, a single S2 may occur when the aortic valve is regurgitant,
severely stenotic, or atretic (or in truncus arteriosus when there is a single common valve).
Diastolic Heart Sounds
 
Split Second Heart Sound in Left Bundle Branch Block
Sound is that of paradoxical splitting, ie, S1–P2–A2 at rest (“out”) and S1–S2 with inspiration (“in”). Left
bundle branch block delays aortic valve closure, so that split is audible at rest; inspiration decreases
intrathoracic pressure, drawing more blood into the right ventricle and postponing pulmonic valve closure
until it is superimposed on A2 and splitting becomes inaudible.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 5/15

  
 
Split Second Heart Sound in Right Bundle Branch Block
Sound is that of wide splitting, ie, S1–A2–P2 at rest (“out”) with an even wider A2–P2 interval with
inspiration (“in”). Right bundle branch block delays pulmonic valve closure so that S2 splitting becomes
audible at rest. Inspiration decreases intrathoracic pressure, drawing more blood into the right ventricle
and postponing pulmonic valve closure even more, so that the normal split becomes wider.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Split Second Heart Sound With Atrial Septal Defect
Sound is that of fixed second heart sound (S2) splitting, ie, S1–A2–P2 at rest (“out”) and with inspiration
(“in”). Splitting is fixed because the volume of flow through the right ventricle is increased throughout the
respiratory cycle, eliminating the normal delay in closure of the pulmonic valve associated with inspiration.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Third Heart Sound
Sound is that of S1–S2–S3.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Fourth Heart Sound
Sound is that of S4–S1–S2.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Summation Gallop
Sound is that of S4–S1–S2–S3 in rapid succession.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Diastolic Knock
A diastolic knock is a loud third heart sound (S3) caused by constrictive pericarditis.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 6/15

  
 
Mitral Valve Opening Snap
Sound is that of S1–A2–OS with a relatively long A2–OS interval. The opening snap (OS), most commonly
caused by mitral stenosis, is thought to be caused by abrupt downward bulging (snapping) of the anterior
leaflet as left ventricular pressure drops below left atrial pressure during diastole. A2–OS can be
distinguished from a split S2 by dynamic maneuvers (OS intensity increases with inspiration, A2–OS
interval widens with standing), a triple S2 (ie, A2–P2–OS), and a louder volume at the apex.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
S3 occurs in early diastole, when the ventricle is dilated and noncompliant. It occurs during passive
diastolic ventricular filling and usually indicates serious ventricular dysfunction in adults; in children, it
can be normal, sometimes persisting even to age 40 years. S3 also may be normal during pregnancy.
Right ventricular S3 is heard best (sometimes only) during inspiration (because negative intrathoracic
pressure augments right ventricular filling volume) with the patient supine. Left ventricular S3 is best
heard during expiration (because the heart is nearer the chest wall) with the patient in the left lateral
decubitus position.
S4 is produced by augmented ventricular filling, caused by atrial contraction, near the end of diastole. It
is similar to S3 and heard best or only with the bell of the stethoscope. During inspiration, right
ventricular S4 increases and left ventricular S4 decreases. S4 is heard much more often than S3 and
indicates a lesser degree of ventricular dysfunction, usually diastolic. S4 is absent in atrial fibrillation
(because the atria do not contract) but is almost always present in active myocardial ischemia or soon
after myocardial infarction. Whereas S3 can be a normal finding, S4 is always abnormal.
S3, with or without S4, is usual in significant systolic left ventricular dysfunction; S4 without S3 is usual in
diastolic left ventricular dysfunction.
A summation gallop occurs when S3 and S4 are present in a patient with tachycardia, which shortens
diastole so that the 2 sounds merge. Loud S3 and S4 may be palpable at the apex when the patient is in
the left lateral decubitus position.
A diastolic knock occurs at the same time as S3, in early diastole. It is not accompanied by S4 and is a
louder, thudding sound, which indicates abrupt arrest of ventricular filling by a noncompliant,
constricting pericardium.
An opening snap (OS) may occur in early diastole in mitral stenosis or, rarely, in tricuspid stenosis.
Mitral opening snap is very high pitched, brief, and heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope.
The more severe mitral stenosis is (ie, the higher the left atrial pressure), the closer the opening snap is
to the pulmonic component of S2. Intensity is related to the compliance of the valve leaflets: The snap
sounds loud when leaflets remain elastic, but it gradually softens and ultimately disappears as sclerosis,
fibrosis, and calcification of the valve develop. Mitral opening snap, although sometimes heard at the
apex, is often heard best or only at the lower left sternal border.
Approach to murmurs
 7/15

  
Timing of the murmur in the cardiac cycle correlates with the cause (see table Etiology of Murmurs by
Timing); auscultatory findings correlate with specific heart valve disorders. Various maneuvers (eg,
inspiration, Valsalva, handgrip, squatting, amyl nitrate inhalation) can modify cardiac physiology slightly,
making differentiation of causes of heart murmur possible (see table Maneuvers That Aid in Diagnosis
of Murmurs).
TABLE
Etiology of Murmurs by Timing
Timing Associated Disorders
Outflow obstruction (aortic sclerosis,
aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
subvalvular stenosis, supravalvular
stenosis)
Dilation of ascending aorta (aneurysm of
aorta, aortitis, atheroma )
Dilation of pulmonary artery
Increased blood flow across the aortic
Mid systolic (ejection)
valve (aortic regurgitation, hyperkinetic
states)
Increased blood flow across the
pulmonic valve (hyperkinetic states, left-
to-right shunt due to atrial septal defect,
ventricular septal defect)
Pulmonic obstruction (infundibular
stenosis, pulmonic stenosis,
supravalvular pulmonary artery stenosis,
branch pulmonary artery stenosis)
Mitral valve prolapse
Mid-late systolic
Papillary muscle dysfunction
Mitral regurgitation
Holosystolic Tricuspid regurgitation
Ventricular septal defect
Early diastolic (regurgitant) Aortic regurgitation:
Acquired or congenital valve
abnormality (eg, endocarditis,
 8/15

  
Timing Associated Disorders
myxomatous or calcific
degeneration, rheumatic fever),
dilation of valve ring (eg,
annuloaortic ectasia, aortic
dissection, cystic medial necrosis,
hypertension), widening of
commissures (eg, syphilis)
Congenital bicuspid aortic valve with
or without ventricular septal defect
Pulmonic regurgitation:
Acquired or congenital valve
abnormality
Dilation of valve ring (eg, pulmonary
hypertension, Marfan syndrome)
Tetralogy of Fallot
Ventricular septal defect
Atrial ball-valve thrombi
Increased blood flow across nonstenotic
mitral valve (eg, mitral regurgitation,
ventricular septal defect, patent ductus
arteriosus, high-output states, complete
heart block)
Increased blood flow across nonstenotic
tricuspid valve (eg, tricuspid
Mid diastolic
regurgitation, atrial septal defect,
anomalous pulmonary venous return)
Left or right atrial tumors
Mitral stenosis (eg, due to rheumatic
fever, congenital stenosis, cor
triatriatum)
Tricuspid stenosis
Continuous Patent ductus arteriosus
Venous hum
Coronary-cameral fistula
 9/15

  
Timing Associated Disorders
Coarctation of the aorta or pulmonary
artery
Severe pulmonary artery branch
stenosis
Anomalous left coronary artery
Aortic–right ventricular or atrial fistula
Bronchial collateral circulation
Coronary or intercostal arteriovenous
fistula
Mammary souffle (venous hum from
engorged breast vessels during
pregnancy)
Proximal coronary artery stenosis
Ruptured aneurysm of sinus of Valsalva
Small (restrictive) atrial septal defect with
mitral stenosis
TABLE
Maneuvers That Aid in Diagnosis of Murmurs
Maneuver Effect on Blood Flow Effect on Heart Sounds
Augments murmurs of
hypertrophic obstructive
Causes intense
cardiomyopathy, aortic
venodilation, which
stenosis and mitral valve
Amyl nitrite
reduces venous return to
prolapse
the right heart
Reduces murmur of mitral
regurgitation
Inspiration Decreases intrathoracic Augments right heart
pressure, which sounds (eg, murmurs of
simultaneously increases tricuspid stenosis and
venous flow into the right regurgitation, those of
ventricle (RV) and pulmonic stenosis*
decreases pulmonary [immediately] and
regurgitation [usually])
 10/15

  
Maneuver Effect on Blood Flow Effect on Heart Sounds
venous flow into the left
Reduces left heart sounds
heart
Reduces murmurs of
aortic stenosis,
hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy, mitral
valve prolapse, or papillary
Increases afterload and
muscle dysfunction
Isometric handgrip peripheral arterial
resistance
Augments murmurs of
mitral regurgitation and
aortic regurgitation and
diastolic murmur of mitral
stenosis
Augments murmurs of
aortic stenosis, aortic
regurgitation (after 4 or 5
beats), and pulmonic
Release of Valsalva Increases volume of RV
regurgitation or pulmonic
maneuver and left ventricle (LV)
stenosis* (immediately)
Reduces murmur of
tricuspid stenosis
Augments murmurs of
aortic regurgitation, aortic
stenosis, mitral
Simultaneously increases
regurgitation and diastolic
venous return to the right
murmur of mitral stenosis
Squatting heart and increases
afterload and peripheral
Reduces murmur of
resistance
hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy and
mitral valve prolapse
Augments murmur of
hypertrophic obstructive
Increases intrathoracic
cardiomyopathy and
pressure, which reduces
mitral valve prolapse
size of LV; decreases
Valsalva maneuver
venous return to the right
Reduces murmurs of
heart and subsequently to
aortic stenosis, mitral
the left heart
regurgitation, and
tricuspid stenosis
 11/15

  
* Patient may need to be standing for effect on pulmonic stenosis to be heard.
All patients with heart murmurs are evaluated by chest radiography and electrocardiography (ECG).
Echocardiography is required to confirm the diagnosis, determine severity, and track severity over time.
Usually, a cardiac consultation is obtained if significant disease is suspected.
Systolic murmurs
Systolic murmurs may be normal or abnormal. They may be early, mid, or late systolic, or holosystolic
(pansystolic). Systolic murmurs may be divided into ejection, regurgitant, and shunt murmurs.
Ejection murmurs are due to turbulent forward flow through narrowed or irregular valves or outflow
tracts (eg, due to aortic stenosis or pulmonic stenosis). They are typically mid systolic and have a
crescendo-diminuendo character that usually becomes louder and longer as flow becomes more
obstructed. The greater the stenosis and turbulence, the longer the crescendo phase and the shorter
the diminuendo phase.
Systolic ejection murmurs may occur without hemodynamically significant outflow tract obstruction
(called innocent or functional murmurs) and thus do not necessarily indicate a disorder. In normal
infants and children, flow is often mildly turbulent, producing these soft ejection murmurs. (A Still
murmur is a vibratory, systolic, innocent murmur thought to be caused by vibration of the chordae
tendineae of the mitral valve.) Older patients often have ejection murmurs due to valve and vessel
sclerosis.
During pregnancy, many women have soft ejection murmurs at the second intercostal space to the left
or right of the sternum. The murmurs occur because a physiologic increase in blood volume and cardiac
output increases flow velocity through normal structures. The murmurs may be greatly exaggerated if
severe anemia complicates the pregnancy. These murmurs are distinct from the venous hum
sometimes caused by engorged breast vessels during pregnancy (mammary souffle).
Regurgitant murmurs represent retrograde flow (eg, due to mitral regurgitation, tricuspid
regurgitation). A similar murmur can occur with a ventricular septal defect. Both are typically
holosystolic and tend to be louder with high-velocity, low-volume regurgitation or shunts and softer with
high-volume regurgitation or shunts.
AUDIO
Mitral Valve Prolapse
Late systolic murmurs, which may or may not be preceded by a click, are typical of mitral valve
prolapse or papillary muscle dysfunction.
Shunt murmurs may originate at the site of the shunt (eg, patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal
defect) or result from altered hemodynamics remote from the shunt (eg, pulmonic systolic flow murmur
due to an atrial septal defect with left-to-right shunt). Atrial shunt murmurs are rarely, if ever, audible.
 12/15

  
AUDIO
Mitral Valve Prolapse (With Late-Systolic Click)
Various maneuvers are usually required for more accurate diagnosis of timing and type of murmur (see
table Maneuvers That Aid in Diagnosis of Murmurs).
Systolic Murmurs
 
Aortic Stenosis Murmur
The 6th beat is a ventricular premature beat (VPB). The 7th beat illustrates post-VPB potentiation of the
murmur due to increased left ventricular filling during the post-VPB compensatory pause.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Pulmonary Stenosis Murmur
The murmur becomes audible only with inspiration (“in”) because inspiration decreases intrathoracic
pressure, drawing more blood into the right ventricle and increasing right ventricular outflow.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Mitral Regurgitation Murmur
This holosystolic mitral regurgitation murmur maintains the same intensity throughout systole and
extends from S1 to S2.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
 
Ventricular Septal Defect Murmur
The murmur of a ventricular septal defect is similar to that of mitral regurgitation but is louder at the left
lower sternal border than at the apex.
Recording provided by Jules Constant, MD.
Diastolic murmurs
 13/15

  
Diastolic murmurs are always abnormal; most are early or mid diastolic, but they may be late diastolic
(presystolic). Early diastolic murmurs are typically due to aortic regurgitation or pulmonic regurgitation.
Mid diastolic (or early to mid diastolic) murmurs are typically due to mitral stenosis or tricuspid stenosis.
In a patient in sinus rhythm, a late diastolic murmur may be due to rheumatic mitral stenosis.
A mitral or tricuspid murmur due to an atrial tumor or thrombus may be evanescent and may vary with
position and from one examination to the next because the position of the intracardiac mass changes.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Systolic murmurs may be normal or abnormal, but diastolic murmurs are always
abnormal.
Continuous murmurs
Continuous murmurs occur throughout the cardiac cycle. They are always abnormal, indicating shunt
flow throughout systole and diastole, hence remaining audible through S2. They may be due to various
cardiac defects (see table Etiology of Murmurs by Timing). Some defects produce a thrill; many are
associated with signs of right or left ventricular hypertrophy. As pulmonary artery resistance increases
in shunt lesions, the diastolic component gradually decreases. When pulmonary and systemic resistance
equalize, the murmur may disappear.
Patent ductus arteriosus murmurs are loudest at the second intercostal space just below the medial
end of the left clavicle. Aortopulmonary window murmurs are central and heard at the third intercostal
space level. Murmurs of systemic arteriovenous fistulas are best heard directly over the lesions; those of
pulmonic arteriovenous fistulas and pulmonary artery branch stenosis are more diffuse and heard
throughout the chest.
AUDIO
Patent Ductus Arteriosus Murmurs
When circulation is increased, as occurs during pregnancy, anemia, and hyperthyroidism, a continuous
venous hum is often heard in the right supraclavicular fossa; this venous hum also occurs normally in
children. The sound generated by increased flow in a dilated internal mammary artery (mammary
souffle), may be mistaken for a continuous cardiac murmur. Mammary souffle is typically heard best
over the breast at the level of the right and/or left second or third intercostal space and, although often
classified as continuous, is usually louder during systole.
Pericardial friction rub
A pericardial friction rub is caused by movement of inflammatory adhesions between visceral and
parietal pericardial layers. It is a high-pitched or squeaking sound; it may be systolic, diastolic and
systolic, or triphasic (when atrial contraction accentuates the diastolic component during late diastole).
 14/15

  
The rub sounds like pieces of leather squeaking as they are rubbed together. Rubs are best heard with
the patient leaning forward or on hands and knees with breath held in expiration.