=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:50.929323",
  "file_size_bytes": 468211,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Cardiac tamponade overview
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com);
Associate Editor-In-Chief: Cafer Zorkun, M.D., Ph.D. [2] (mailto:czorkun@wikidoc.org);
Varun Kumar, M.B.B.S Ramyar Ghandriz MD[3] (mailto:rghandri@bidmc.harvard.edu)
Contents
• Overview
• Historical Perspective
• Classification
• Pathophysiology
• Causes
• Differentiating cardiac tamponade from Other Diseases
• Epidemiology and Demographics
• Risk Factors
• Screening
• Natural History, Complications, and Prognosis
• Diagnosis
• Diagnostic Study of Choice
• History and Symptoms
• Physical Examination
• Laboratory Findings
• Electrocardiogram
• X-ray
• Echocardiography and Ultrasound
• CT scan
• MRI
• Other Imaging Findings
• Other Diagnostic Studies
• Treatment
• Medical Therapy
• Surgery
• Primary Prevention
• Secondary Prevention
• References
Overview
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 1/6
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
Cardiac tamponade is a medical emergency condition in which fluid/blood accumulates in the
pericardium (the sac in which the heart is enclosed). The elevated pericardial pressure puts
significant pressure on the heart, causing a decrease in the diastolic filling of the ventricles, and
hence in stroke volume. The end result is ineffective pumping of blood, shock, and potentially
death. It is caused mainly by the accumulation of a large or uncontrolled pericardial effusion. The
effusion can occur rapidly (as in the case of trauma or myocardial rupture), or over a more gradual
period of time (as in cancer). The fluid involved is often blood, but pus is also found in some
circumstances. Common causes of increased pericardial effusion include hypothyroidism, trauma
(either penetrating trauma involving the pericardium or blunt chest trauma), pericarditis
(inflammation of the pericardium), iatrogenic trauma (during an invasive procedure), and
ventricular rupture. It should be differentiated from tension pneumothorax, hypovolemia and
acute congestive heart failure. Patients with cardiac tamponade may present with sudden onset of
chest pain, palpitations, breathlessness and lightheadedness. Physical examination may show the
classic Beck's triad (hypotension, muffled heart sound, and elevated jugular venous distension),
tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, and pericardial rub depending on the type, and severity of
tamponade. The electrocardiogram in cardiac tamponade usually demonstrates sinus tachycardia,
and may sometimes show reduced QRS voltage and electrical alternans. Chest X ray will
demonstrate pneumopericardium and cardiac silhouette changes. Echocardiography findings
include pericardial effusion, diastolic compression of the RV, diastolic compression of the right
atrium (RA), plethora of the inferior vena cava and paradoxical septal motion. Pericardiocentesis
can provide a diagnostic sampling of pericardial fluid and can be used as a therapeutic maneuver
to evacuate pericardial fluid and lower the pericardial pressure.
Historical Perspective
Cardiac tamponade is a very common emergent manifestation, which can be caused by traumatic
injuries, since the emulation of the disease tracks back to centuries ago. Acknowledgment of
existing pericardial is first done by hippocrates, which was continued by Galen to describing what
is now known as pericardial effusion.
Classification
Cardiac tamponade is an emergency form of cardiac effusion. it is more over classified by the
pathological causes. The management of emergent situation is not very differed by the basic cause.
Pathophysiology
Cardiac tamponade occurs when the pericardial space fills up with fluid faster than the pericardial
sac can stretch. If the amount of fluid increases slowly (such as in hypothyroidism) the pericardial
sac can expand to contain a liter or more of fluid prior to tamponade occurring. If the fluid occurs
rapidly (as may occur after trauma or myocardial rupture) as little as 100 ml can cause tamponade.
However, if the volume of the fluid accumulation is too rapid and or large, then the hemodynamic
compromise can occur with a rise in pericardial pressure. This in turn reduces stroke volume, and
eventually, cardiac output. If fluid continues to accumulate, then with each successive diastole, less
and less blood enters the ventricles, as the increasing pressure presses on the heart and forces the
septum to bend into the left ventricle, leading to a decreased stroke volume.
Causes
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 2/6
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
Cardiac tamponade is caused by the accumulation of a large or uncontrolled pericardial effusion.
The effusion can occur rapidly (as in the case of trauma or myocardial rupture), or over a more
gradual period of time (as in cancer). The fluid involved is often blood, but pus is also found in
some circumstances. Common causes of increased pericardial effusion include hypothyroidism,
trauma (either penetrating trauma involving the pericardium or blunt chest trauma), pericarditis
(inflammation of the pericardium), iatrogenic trauma (during an invasive procedure), and
ventricular rupture.
Differentiating cardiac tamponade from Other Diseases
The initial diagnosis of cardiac tamponade can be challenging, as there are a number of differential
diagnoses, including tension pneumothorax, hypovolemia and acute congestive heart failure. The
differential diagnosis of cardiac tamponade differs based on the type of cardiac tamponade (either
acute or subacute).
Epidemiology and Demographics
The cardiac tamponade is most often attributed to the rupture of an acute myocardial infarction or
an intrapericardial rupture of a dissecting ascending aortic aneurysm. In developed countries
malignancy is the leading cause of cardiac tamponade secondary to pericardial effusion. The
incidence of cardiac tamponade based on a giant sample size of about 216 million emergency
admissions was about 115,638(0.05%). The incidence of cardiac tamponade increases with age; the
mean age was around 61.9. Cardiac temponade mortality rate is significantly different due to its
underlying cause.
Risk Factors
Most potent risk factors for cardiac tamponade include heart surgeries, cardiac myxomas,
myocardial infarction and traumas.
Screening
Cardiac tamponade is more of a clinical diagnosis. If the patient clinical manifestation was raising
suspicious toward tamponade, CT scan and echocardiogram are diagnostic gold standards for the
disease.
Natural History, Complications, and Prognosis
Cardiac tamponade is a life-threatening condition requiring urgent intervention to remove the
pericardial fluid. Complications include pulmonary edema, cardiac failure, cardiogenic shock and
ultimately death.
Cardiac tamponade has a good prognosis if detected early and treated immediately. Short-term
survival is mostly dependent on early diagnosis and relief of tamponade. Long-term survival
depends upon the prognosis of the underlying cause, irrespective of the mode of treatment.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic Study of Choice
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 3/6
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
Cardiac tamponade is more of a clinical diagnosis, but still some diagnostic studies may be helpful.
History and Symptoms
Patients with cardiac tamponade may present with sudden onset of chest pain, palpitations,
breathlessness and lightheadedness. Presentation vary with the cause and acuteness of
development of tamponade. An acute cardiac tamponade follows trauma to the chest or rupture of
the aorta or heart. A subacute cardiac tamponade occurs in the setting of a neoplasm or renal
failure. A low pressure cardiac tamponade occurs in patients who are hypovolemic secondary to
hemorrhage or over diuresis.
Physical Examination
Physical examination may vary depending on the type of cardiac tamponade. Physical examination
may show the classic Beck's triad (hypotension, muffled heart sound, and elevated jugular venous
distension), tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, and pericardial rub depending on the type, and
severity of tamponade. Initial diagnosis can be challenging, as there are a number of differential
diagnoses, including tension pneumothorax, and acute heart failure.
Laboratory Findings
Non-specific markers of inflammation are generally elevated in pericarditis. This include the CBC,
elevated C-reactive protein, ESR. The cardiac troponin is elevated if there is injury to the
underlying myocardium, a condition termed myopericarditis. Diagnostic pericardiocentesis and
biopsy help in identifying an underlying infectious or malignant process.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiogram in cardiac tamponade usually demonstrates sinus tachycardia, and may
sometimes show reduced QRS voltage and electrical alternans.
X-ray
Cardiac tamponade is a clinical diagnosis, however chest X ray can be helpful sometimes. It will
demonstrate pneumopericardium and cardiac silhouette changes.
Echocardiography and Ultrasound
The role of echocardiography in the evaluation of the patient with pericarditis is to characterize the
presence, size, location and hemodynamic impact of a pericardial effusion. Tamponade is
characterized by pericardial effusion, diastolic compression of the RV, diastolic compression of the
right atrium (RA), plethora of the inferior vena cava and paradoxical septal motion.
CT scan
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 4/6
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
A CT scan is not commonly used for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade as it is effectively
diagnosed based on clinical features and echocardiography. Findings on CT include [Superior vena
cava]] andInferior vena cava enlargement, Hepatic and renal vein enlargment, periportal edema,
reflux of contrast material, collapse of the right atrium, Pericardial thickening.
MRI
Cardiovascular MRI is not commonly used for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade as it is
effectively diagnosed based on clinical features and echocardiography. Findings include Pericardial
effusion, distension of the vena cavae and hepatic vein, collapse of the right sided cardiac
chambers, interventricular septum shifts towards the left, paradoxical septal motion.
Other Imaging Findings
There are no other imaging findings associated with cardiac tamponade.
Other Diagnostic Studies
There are no other diagnostic studies associated with cardiac tampnoade.
Treatment
Medical Therapy
If the patient is symptomatic, and if there are signs of cardiac tamponade, urgent
pericardiocentesis should be performed. Additional supportive therapy includes the administration
of oxygen, fluid repletion, echocardiographic monitoring, treatment of underlying pathology,
reversal of anticoagulation and monitoring.
Surgery
Percutaneous pericardiocentesis is a procedure where fluid is aspirated from the pericardium (the
sac enveloping the heart) using a needle via a percutaneous approach. Pericardiocentesis can
provide a diagnostic sampling of pericardial fluid and can be used as a therapeutic maneuver to
evacuate pericardial fluid and lower the pericardial pressure.
Primary Prevention
There are no established measures for the primary prevention of cardiac tamponade.
Secondary Prevention
There are no established measures for the secondary prevention of cardiac tamponade.
References
Template:WikiDoc Sources
CNooakviiegsa thieolnp uWsi kdieDliovce |r Wouikri sPeartiveincet s| .U Bpy Tuos iDnagt eo uPra gseesr v| iRceesc,e nyotluy Eagdriteeed t Poa oguers |u Rsee coefn ctolyo Akidedse.d Pictures
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 5/6
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 16:21 Cardiac tamponade overview - wikidoc
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_tamponade_overview 6/6
