=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Cardiac stress test - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:04.389993",
  "file_size_bytes": 499717,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Cardiac stress test - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Cardiac stress test
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailt
o:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com)
A Cardiac Stress Test is a medical test performed to
evaluate arterial blood flow to (and indirectly the amount of
oxygen that will reach) the myocardium (heart muscle)
during physical exercise, compared to blood flow while at
rest. As an exercise test, the results can also reflect overall An elderly man walks on a stress test
treadmill to check his heart's functioning.
physical fitness. These tests do not assess Emotional
stress, or other connotations of the term stress.
Stress test abnormalities (i.e. if it is "positive") are an indication of marked imbalances of relative
blood flow to different portions of the Left Ventricular muscle tissue of the heart. This is
important because the Left Ventricle of the heart performs the greatest amount of work involved in
pumping blood around the body. Blood flow imbalances within the heart muscle of the other three
heart chambers are not detected this way.
Usually, only High Grade Stenoses (i.e. severe narrowing) of the larger coronary (surface of the
heart) arteries can be detected. Severe stenoses, e.g. those greater than 75% occlusion, are usually
the result of advanced Atherosclerosis (i.e. hardening of the arteries, or arterial disease) and these
High Grade Stenoses are the usual cause for both "stable" or reproducible exercise-related Angina
(chest pain) and for "positive" stress tests. Less severe stenoses are automatically compensated for,
by vasodilation (widening or relaxing) of the ventricular arterioles during exercise, and do not
usually produce enough of an imbalance of relative blood flow, to be detectable by stress test
methods.
What most laypersons do not realize, is that stress tests do not detect Atheromata (plaques of
Cholesterol and other fats, etc) present throughout the heart or other body arteries, nor do they
reveal the Vulnerable Plaques, which are the cause of most Heart Attacks or Myocardial
Infarctions. Recent (late 1990's) clinical studies have shown, that the vulnerable plaques which
produce most myocardial infarctions are commonly present within many regions of the coronary
(surface of the heart) arteries, yet are typically relatively flat, i.e. not protruding into the artery
lumen sufficiently to produce enough stenosis (usually less than 50%, average 20% by some IVUS
studies) to be detectable by stress test methods. Thus, over the last 20 years or so, newer
approaches in research, have increasingly focused on IMT to detect plaque at earlier stages of
progression, before the artery lumen becomes severely stenosed, or compromised.
So the major limitation of the stress test approach, is that it needs a high grade stenosis as an
indicator of heart attack risk. High grade stenosis, while being a good indicator of advanced
arterial disease, is not the major cause for the majority of heart attacks. This issue is also reflected
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 1/8
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
in the results of the COURAGE trial[1], which demonstrated that "intensive pharmacologic therapy
and lifestyle intervention", which they called "Optimal Medical Therapy" (not opening stenoses
with Angioplasty, per-se) produced the more effective results in survival and quality of life.
Contents
• Test overview
• Purpose
• Variations
• Diagnostic value
• Risks
• Conclusion
• Further research
• See also
• References
• Additional Resources
• External links
Test overview
The patient either walks on a treadmill, or is given IV medication which simulates exercise, while
connected to an ECG machine, usually the standard 10 connections, used to record a 12-lead ECG.
The level of exercise is increased by 3 minute stages, of progressively increased Grade (% incline)
and Speed (mph, km/h, etc). The patient's symptoms, and blood pressure response are repeatedly
checked. When using ECG and Blood Pressure monitoring alone, the test is variously called a
Cardiac Stress test, Exercise Stress test, Exercise Treadmill test, Exercise Tolerance test, Stress
Test or Exercise ECG test.
If Radioactive Isotopes are also used (commonly, Technetium Tc99m Sestamibi and rarely,
Thallium-201), then it is usually called a Nuclear Stress Test. Given the ability to visualize the
relative amounts of radioisotope within different regions of the heart muscle, nuclear stress tests
are more accurate in detecting regional areas of decreased blood flow to myocardial (heart muscle)
cells. However, diffuse global ischemia (decreased blood flow that is evenly spread out) may still
not be recognized, because absolute blood flow is not quantitatively measured, only regional
comparative variations.
Purpose
The American Heart Association recommends EKG treadmill testing as the first choice for patients
with medium risks of coronary heart disease based on the risk factors of smoking, family history of
coronary stenosis, hypertension, diabetes and high cholesterol.
Perfusion radioisotope stress testing using Tc-99m tetrofosmin, Tc-99m sestamibi, or Tl-201 is
appropriate for select patients, especially those with an abnormal resting EKG. More severe
stenosis (probably greater than 70% occlusion) can produce abnormalities in both EKG waveforms
and cardiac wall motion at rest or under stress echocardiographic testing. Such high grade
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 2/8
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
narrowings are typically the primary culprit responsible for those angina episodes which
reproducibly occur at a given level of exercise. However, most heart attacks result from rupture of
atheroma lesions associated with only mild narrowing (20% on average by intravascular
ultrasound (IVUS) clinical studies), thus stress tests do not work well for detecting the vulnerable
plaques which are responsible for most heart attacks. Like all tests, stress testing has problems
with both falsely positive and falsely negative results compared with other clinical tests.
Angiogram and/or intracoronary ultrasound (preferably in a hospital capable of Percutaneous
Coronary Intervention [PCI] with stenting) can provide even greater information, but at the risk of
complications associated with cardiac catheterization.
Variations
Some patients with abnormal resting EKGs, or those who are unable to walk safely, can be
"exercised" pharmacologically instead of walking on a treadmill. The patient will typically receive a
pharmaceutical such as dipyridamole or adenosine (both vasodilators) or dobutamine (stimulates
heart rate and pumping force) while a cardiologist or physician assistant reviews the
electrocardiogram (EKG) tracing and checks blood pressure periodically.
A radiotracer (typically Technetium-99m sestamibi, Technetium-99m tetrofosmin, or Thallium-
201) is injected at peak exertion. After a suitable waiting period, pictures are taken with a gamma
camera. The pictures can then be compared with the patient's resting images in order to assess the
status of the patient's coronary arteries.
Diagnostic value
The American Heart Association journal, Circulation, describes:
Treadmill test: sensitivity of 67%, specificity of 70%
Nuclear test: sensitivity of 81%, specificity of 85-95%
However, these numbers reference detection of advanced artery luminal narrowing as assessed by
stress methods compared with angiography as the "gold standard". As a predictor of future heart
attack, both methods suffer in that they only detect lumen stenosis, a common symptom of some
very advanced atheroma, but not the vulnerable plaques which produce most heart attacks.
Because of this, most clinical cardiology experience demonstrates that the actual sensitivity and
specificity values for detecting likelihood of future heart attack, as opposed to lumen narrowing,
are much lower than stated above.
Whatever the actual numbers, the value of stress tests has increasingly been recognized as limited,
especially for people without symptoms. Yet, according to United States data from 2004, for about
65% of men and 47% of women, the first symptom of cardiovascular disease is heart attack or
sudden death (death within one hour of symptom onset).
Over the last couple of decades, other methods have been increasingly developed as ways to better
detect atherosclerotic disease before it becomes symptomatic. These have included both (a)
anatomic detection methods and (b) physiologic measurement methods.
Examples of anatomic methods include: (1) coronary calcium scoring by CT, (2) carotid IMT
(intimal medial thickness) measurement by ultrasound, e.g. IntiMaTe, and (3) IVUS.
Examples of physiologic methods include: (1) lipoprotein subclass analysis, (2) HbA1c, (3) hs-CRP,
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
and (4) homocysteine.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 3/8
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
The example of the metabolic syndrome combines both anatomic (abdominal girth) and
physiologic (blood pressure, elevated blood glucose) methods.
Advantages: The anatomic methods directly measure some aspect of the actual atherosclerotic
disease process itself, thus offer potential for earlier detection, including before symptoms start,
disease staging and tracking of disease progression. The physiologic methods are often less
expensive and safer and changing them for the better may slow disease progression, in some cases
with marked improvement.
Disadvantages: The anatomic methods are generally more expensive and several are invasive, such
as IVUS. The physiologic methods do not quantify the current state of the disease or directly track
progression. For both, clinicians and third party payers have been slow to accept the usefulness of
these newer approaches.
Risks
Absolute contraindications to cardiac stress testing include acute myocardial infarction [MI] (heart
attack) within 48 hrs, unstable angina not yet stabilized with medical therapy, uncontrolled
arrhythmia which may have significant hemodynamic responses (for example ventricular
tachycardia), symptomatic severe aortic stenosis, aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism,
pericarditis.
Major side effects from cardiac stress testing can include palpitation, chest pain, shortness of
breath, headache, nausea, or fatigue. Adenosine and dipyridamole can cause mild drug-induced
hypotension. However, hypotension caused by exercise stress testing or dobutamine is almost
always abnormal and concerning for severe coronary disease.
Stress tests using radiological agents confer a definite (albeit low) long term risk of cancer, but
patients undergoing such examinations often receive little or inaccurate information about these
risks. For comparison, the annual background radiation per annum a person receives is
approximately 3 mSv. A chest xray is approximately 0.1 mSv. A coronary angiogram (cardiac
catheterization) has an effective dose of 3-20 mSv (depending on operator skill, type of
intervention, etc). A routine chest helical MDCT is around 5-7 mSv. A cardiac CT (with
retrospective EKG gating) is around 8-13 mSv (Morin). A sestamibi scan is approximately 12 mSv.
A thallium scan is approximately 25 mSv. A thallium scan corresponds the dose of 250 chest x rays,
or an extra cancer risk of about 1 in 16000 exposed patients (A. de González). The lifetime risk of
fatal cancer development is 4%/Sv or 0.004%/mSv or about 0.1% for a thallium scan. Therefore,
frequent usage of these tests has to balance the benefits against the risks of radiation.
Another major risk of stress testing, whether by exercise or pharmacological agents, is the
possibility of inducing an MI, especially in patients with severe multi-vessel coronary artery
disease. This risk, however, is substantially lower than the risk of major complications (such as
inducing a heart attack, stroke, peripheral artery clot and embolism) from cardiac catheterization
(about 1%).
The choice of pharmacologic stress agent to be used (dobutamine, adenosine, dipyridamole)
depends on factors such as concurrent medications and diseases. Dobutamine is usually used when
a patient has asthma or severe COPD, takes the medication theophylline or has ingested coffee or
chocolate (anything with caffeine), or has 2nd or 3rd degree AV block (a type of heart block).
Adenosine or dipyridamole is generally used when a patient has poorly controlled hypertension,
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
glaucoma, or has left bundle branch block (LBBB, another type of heart block). It is well known
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 4/8
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
that patients with LBBB can have false positive septal ischemia if dobutamine is used as a
pharmacologic agent in nuclear stress test. The adverse effects associated with the use of
pharmacologic stress test agents can be reversed upon completion of the test. For drugs that
promote adenosine (including dipyrimadole or adenosine itself), adenosine antagonists that
constrict blood vessels such as theophylline or caffeine can be given. The adverse effects of beta-
agonists like dobutamine can be reversed with the administration of a beta-blocking agent such as
propranolol.
Conclusion
Most physicians support the population-wide reduction of risk factors which cause heart attack.
These risk factors are contained in the well-known cardiac Framingham Risk Score. Physicians
typically take a history; perform a physical and then obtain baseline bloodwork and a resting EKG.
Stress testing is the established method of investigating moderate-risk patients for coronary artery
disease as well as obtaining prognostic information for the patient.
Further research
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has expanded the choice of modalities available for cardiac
stress testing. MRI has superior spatial resolution (on the order of around 1.5 mm for cine imaging
and 2.5 mm for perfusion imaging), and temporal resolution (around 40 ms for cine imaging),
compared with that of a nuclear or PET stress test (spatial resolution of around 9mm for nuclear
and 6mm for PET). The increased spatial resolution allows for more sensitive detection of
ischemia, which initially starts at the thin subendocardial layer, due to stenotic epicardial supply
vessels. First-pass stress perfusion cardiac MR imaging is performed using a rapid bolus injection
of gadolinium based contrast and rapidly obtaining T1 weighted images of the myocardium at
every R-R interval after pharmacologic stress induced with adenosine. The stress and resting first-
pass perfusion MRI data can then be analyzed using a convolution model (such as the Marquard-
Levenberg least-squares algorithm) to determine the quantitative global myocardial perfusion
reserve (Michael Jerosch-Herold). Delayed hyper-enhancement imaging can be done after 10-15
minutes of contrast injection to evaluate for regions of infarction or fibrosis which has increased
signal due to the slower washout of contrast from these areas (Thomson LE). Stress cardiac MRI
perfusion testing thus is sensitive enough to detect subtle ischemia and myocardial infarctions
even if they are limited only to the subendocardial level. The major problem again is that they still
do not detect the "vulnerable plaques" which is the major cause of most heart attacks.
Stress testing, even if done in time, will detect only some of these people before symptoms, debility
or death. Stress testing methods, though more effective than a resting EKG, only detect medium to
high grade flow limitations; this assuming the testing is fully and aggressively performed.
However, most acute artery flow disrupting events leading to heart attacks are due to rupture of
"vulnerable plaques". Most of the "vulnerable plaques" cause less than 40% lumen narrowing, a
degree of stenosis too small for most stress testing methods to detect.
Historically, through the mid-1980s, it was believed that detecting these high grade stenoses was
the key to recognizing people who would have heart attacks in the future. However, there was also
long-standing experience that some people could exercise all the way to maximum predicted heart
rate, have no abnormal symptoms and completely normal stress test results, only to die of a
massive heart attack within a few days to weeks. While anecdotal and not quantitative, these
observations have long demonstrated the unreliability of the stress test approach as a means of
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 5/8
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
diagnosing arterial disease before serious health problems occur. From the 1960s to 1990s, despite
the success of stress testing identifying many who were at high risk for heart attack, its failure to
correctly identify many others was a conundrum, discussed in medical circles but unexplained.
The high grade stenoses which are detected by stress test methods are often, though not always,
responsible for recurring symptoms of angina. Cardiac stress tests do detect some individuals who
already have with very advanced coronary arterial disease and stenosis, some of whom did not
recognize that they had advanced disease. However, stress test results (especially stress perfusion
cardiac MRI which can detected subtle diffuse subendocardial decreased perfusion due to
microvascular disease) are also sometimes abnormal in some people who do not have high grade
narrowings of their coronary arteries as visualized by coronary angiography, which provides more
accurate information and partial visualization of the coronary artery lumens. This was long viewed
as a false positive result, with some of these individuals diagnosed as having Syndrome X, i.e
meaning clear recurring signs of angina, though with smooth open coronary artery lumens on
coronary angiography. The actual underlying issues responsible for this apparent conundrum are
now better understood, see atheroma and microvascular disease.
In the 1950s, heart attacks were commonly attributed to coronary thrombosis, a clot closure of a
coronary artery, based on post mortem examination findings. In the late 1950s to early 1960s, this
concept became replaced by the concept of stenosis based on the angiographic view of the lumens
of the coronary arteries. In turn the angiographic view led to promotion of cardiac stress testing to
detect stenoses, i.e. the severe ones more commonly present in people experiencing recurrent
angina with physical exertion.
By the early to mid-1990s, it became more widely recognized that rupture of more rapidly evolving
and unstable atheroma, hidden within the walls of the coronary arteries, called "vulnerable
plaques", even though they often produce little or no stenosis of the coronary lumen, is the primary
event which produces most heart attacks; thus back to the coronary thrombosis view, though with
more sophistication of understanding some of the complexities. Two clinical trials published in the
late 1990s, focusing on the relation between plaque structure, lumen stenosis and myocardial
infarction, in which each individuals coronary anatomy was tracked with both angiography and
IVUS found that 75% or greater stenotic areas were responsible for only about 14% of heart attacks.
The typical heart attack occurred at an artery location with extensive, eccentric plaque within the
wall but a luminal stenosis of only 20%. This finding added further evidence to the importance of
the concept of vulnerable plaques. The detection of these vulnerable plaques using high resolution
CT, MRI, IVUS, OCT (Optical Coherence Tomography), and molecular imaging is currently hotly
researched. For CT, as of 2005, 64-slice multidetector machines are providing the best artery and
lumen images, yet still do not clearly reveal which plaques are vulnerable. It is hope that perhaps
with better resolution and ability to characterize the content of the plaques that an imaging
modality may in the future be able to indicate which plaques is "vulnerable" as it is clear that
detecting stenosis itself, however subtle, is not enough.
Unfortunately, cardiac stress tests are only capable of detecting medium to high grade limitations
of blood flow to the left ventricular heart muscle which may produce recurring angina, not the
atheroma which produce heart attacks. Stress test methods do not evaluate blood flow to non-left-
ventricle heart muscle. Thus stress test results are often falsely negative for many people, in terms
of predicting who is at high risk for myocardial infarction due to atheroma or ruptured "vulnerable
plaques".
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 6/8
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
It has become clear that stress testing recognizes most people at risk for heart attacks too late,
unfortunately only after the disease and symptoms of the disease have developed. By the time, a
majority of people would already have at least medium stenosis of coronary vessels with
development of atheroma or have already had heart attacks or died. It is hoped that research in
higher resolution imaging techniques will allow for earlier detection and characterization of subtle
atheroma and to initiate lifestyle changes and optimal medical therapy in "vulnerable patients"
before they develop symptoms.
See also
• Atherosclerosis
• Atheroma
• Cardiac arrhythmia
• Coronary circulation
• Cardiology diagnostic tests and procedures
• Metabolic equivalent - METs
• Robert A. Bruce - invented Bruce treadmill protocol
• Stress testing
References
Additional Resources
• Circulation, Fletcher et al. AHA Exercise • A. de González (2004). "Risk of cancer from
Standards for Testing. 201:104:1694. diagnostic X-rays: estimates for the UK and
• National Guideline Clearinghouse. Cardiac 14 other countries". The Lancet. 363 (9406):
Stress Test Supplement. 345–351..
ICSI:2003Nov.26p.87. • Morin (2003). "Radiation Dose in Computed
• Michael Jerosch-Herold (2004). "Analysis of Tomography of the Heart". Circulation. 107:
myocardial perfusion MRI". Journal of 917–922..
Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 19 (6): 758– • Chung EK, Tighe D (1997). Pocket Guide to
770.. Stress Testing (http://amzn.to/hDN6ve).
• Thomson LE (2004). "Magnetic resonance
imaging for the assessment of myocardial
viability". Journal of Magnetic Resonance
Imaging. 19 (6): 771–788..
External links
• Stress Test Info from the American Heart Association (http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.j
html?identifier=4568)
• NIH Medline Entry (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003878.htm)
• Stress test FAQ's (http://www.heartsite.com/html/regular_stress.html)
• Adenosine Nuclear Stress Test (http://www.mgh.org/education/health/pamphlet.htm)
• Dobutamine Nuclear Stress Test (http://www.midwestheart.com/patient/pdfs/dobutamine_nucle
ar.pdf)
de:Ergometrie he:הירטמוגרא nl:Inspannings-ECG sq:Ergometria
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 7/8
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 16:26 Cardiac stress test - wikidoc
Template:WikiDoc Sources CME Category::Cardiology
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Cardiac_stress_test 8/8
