Cardiac Tumors
Cardiac tumors may be primary (benign or malignant) or metastatic
(malignant). Myxoma, a benign tumor, is the most common type of primary
cardiac tumor. Cardiac tumors may occur in any cardiac tissue. They can cause
valvular or inflow-outflow tract obstruction, thromboembolism, arrhythmias, or
pericardial disorders. Diagnosis is by echocardiography and frequently cardiac
MRI. Treatment of benign tumors is usually surgical resection; tumors may
recur. Treatment of metastatic cancer depends on tumor type and origin;
prognosis is generally poor.
Primary cardiac tumors are found in < 1/5000 people at autopsy (1). Metastatic tumors are much more
common, occurring in one series in > 8% of patients with cancer (2). Usually, primary cardiac tumors
originate in the myocardium or endocardium; they may also originate in valve tissue, cardiac connective
tissue, or the pericardium. Metastatic cardiac tumors typically originate from the lung. Other common
sources of cardiac metastases include breast and kidney carcinoma, melanoma, and lymphoma (2, 3).
Classification of Cardiac Tumors
Some of the more common primary and secondary cardiac tumors are listed in table Types of Cardiac
Tumors. Primary cardiac tumors may be
Benign (approximately 80% of cases [1])
 1/10

  
Malignant (the remaining approximately 20%)
Benign primary cardiac tumors
Examples are myxomas, papillary fibroelastomas, rhabdomyomas, fibromas, hemangiomas, teratomas,
lipomas, paragangliomas, and pericardial cysts.
Myxoma is most common, accounting for 40 to 60% of all primary cardiac tumors (2). Incidence in
females is 2 to 3 times that in males (3). In uncommon familial forms (Carney complex), males are
affected more often. Most myxomas occur in the left atrium (2), and the rest occur in the other
chambers as a solitary tumor or, less commonly, at several sites. Myxomas may be up to 15 cm in
diameter. Most are pedunculated and may prolapse through the mitral valve and obstruct ventricular
filling during diastole. The remainder of the tumors are broad-based and sessile. Myxomas may be
myxoid and gelatinous; smooth, firm, and lobular; or friable and irregular. Friable, irregular myxomas
increase risk of systemic embolism.
Carney complex is a familial, autosomal dominant syndrome of recurrent cardiac myxomas with some
combination of cutaneous myxomas, myxoid mammary fibroadenomas, pigmented skin lesions
(lentigines, ephelides, blue nevi), multiple endocrine neoplasia (primary pigmented nodular
adrenocortical disease causing Cushing syndrome, growth hormone and prolactin-producing pituitary
adenoma, testicular tumors, thyroid adenoma or carcinoma, and ovarian cysts), psammomatous
melanotic schwannoma, breast ductal adenoma, and osteochondromyxoma. Patients are often young
at presentation (median age, 20 years), have multiple myxomas (particularly in the ventricles), and have
a higher risk of myxoma recurrence.
Papillary fibroelastomas are avascular papillomas that occur on heart valves in approximately 80% of
cases (4). The papillomas are more likely to occur on the left side of the heart, predominantly on the
aortic and mitral valves. Males and females are affected equally. They have papillary fronds branching
from a central core, resembling sea anemones. Most are pedunculated. They do not cause valvular
dysfunction but increase the risk of embolism.
Rhabdomyomas affect mainly infants and children, up to 90% of whom also have tuberous sclerosis
(5). Rhabdomyomas are usually multiple and located intramurally in the septum or free wall of the left
ventricle, where they affect the cardiac conduction system. They are firm, white lobules that typically
regress with age. A minority of patients develop tachyarrhythmias and heart failure due to left
ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
Fibromas occur mainly in children and are associated with adenoma sebaceum of the skin and kidney
tumors. They occur primarily on the left side of the heart, are often located within the ventricular
myocardium, and may develop in response to inflammation. They can compress or invade the cardiac
conduction system, causing arrhythmias and sudden death. Some fibromas occur as part of a syndrome
with generalized body overgrowth, jaw keratocytes, skeletal abnormalities, and various benign and
malignant tumors (Gorlin, or basal cell nevus syndrome).
Hemangiomas cause symptoms in a minority of patients. Most often, they are incidentally detected
during examinations done for other reasons.
 2/10

  
Teratomas of the pericardium affect mainly infants and children. They are often attached to the base of
the great vessels. Most are located in the anterior mediastinum; the rest, mainly in the posterior
mediastinum.
Lipomas can develop at a wide range of ages. They originate in the endocardium or epicardium and
have a large pedunculated base. Many are asymptomatic, but some obstruct flow or cause arrhythmias.
Paragangliomas, including pheochromocytomas, rarely occur in the heart; when they do, they are
usually localized to the base of the heart near vagus nerve endings. They may manifest with symptoms
due to catecholamine secretion (eg, increased heart rate and blood pressure, excessive sweating,
tremor). Paragangliomas may be benign or malignant.
Pericardial cysts may resemble a cardiac tumor or pericardial effusion on chest radiograph. They are
usually asymptomatic, although some cause compressive symptoms (eg, chest pain, dyspnea, cough).
Malignant primary cardiac tumors
Malignant primary tumors include sarcomas, pericardial mesothelioma, and primary lymphomas.
Sarcoma is the most common malignant cardiac tumor (1). Sarcomas affect mainly middle-aged adults
(mean, 44 years). Almost 40% are angiosarcomas, most of which originate in the right atrium and
involve the pericardium, causing right ventricular inflow tract obstruction, cardiac tamponade , and lung
metastasis (6). Other types include undifferentiated sarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma,
leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and osteosarcoma; these types are
more likely to originate in the left atrium, causing mitral valve obstruction and heart failure.
Pericardial mesothelioma is rare. It affects all ages, males more than females (7). It causes cardiac
tamponade and constriction, and can metastasize to the spine, adjacent soft tissues, and brain.
Primary lymphoma is extremely rare. It usually occurs in patients with HIV or other people with
immunodeficiency. These tumors grow rapidly and cause heart failure, arrhythmias, cardiac
tamponade, and superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome.
Metastatic tumors
Metastatic tumor from other organs can involve the heart through hematogenous spread or direct
invasion.
Melanoma is a tumor with a high propensity for cardiac involvement. Lung and breast carcinoma, soft-
tissue sarcoma, and renal cancer are also common sources of metastases to the heart (8, 9). Leukemia
and lymphoma often metastasize to the heart, but cardiac involvement may be clinically silent and
detected incidentally. When Kaposi sarcoma spreads systemically in patients with immunodeficiency
(usually patients with HIV), it may spread to the heart, but clinical cardiac complications are uncommon.
TABLE
Types of Cardiac Tumors
 3/10

  
Type Examples*
Myxomas
Papillary fibroelastomas
Rhabdomyomas
Fibromas
Benign primary tumors Hemangiomas
Teratomas
Lipomas
Paraganglionomas†
Pericardial cysts
Sarcomas
Malignant primary tumors Pericardial mesothelioma
Primary lymphomas
Lung carcinoma
Breast carcinoma
Soft-tissue sarcoma
Metastatic tumors Renal carcinoma
Melanoma
Leukemia
Lymphoma
* Listed from most common to least common.
† Paragangliomas can also be malignant.
Symptoms and Signs of Cardiac Tumors
Cardiac tumors cause symptoms and signs typical of much more common disorders (eg, heart failure,
stroke, coronary artery disease). Symptoms and signs of benign primary cardiac tumors depend on
tumor type, location, size, and friability.
Types of symptoms and signs
Symptoms can be classified as
Extracardiac
Intramyocardial
Intracavitary
Extracardiac symptoms and signs may be constitutional or mechanical. Constitutional symptoms of
fever, chills, lethargy, arthralgias, and weight loss may be caused by myxomas, perhaps as a result of
cytokine (eg, interleukin-6) release; however, constitutional symptoms are often absent with myxomas
(1). Petechiae and Raynaud syndrome may also occur. These and other findings may erroneously
suggest bacterial endocarditis, systemic rheumatic disorders, or occult cancer. With some tumors
(especially gelatinous myxomas), thrombi or tumor fragments may embolize into the systemic
circulation (eg, brain, coronary arteries, kidneys, spleen, extremities) or the lungs and cause
manifestations specific to those organs. Mechanical symptoms (eg, dyspnea, chest discomfort) result
from compression of cardiac chambers or coronary arteries or from pericardial irritation or tamponade
caused by growth or hemorrhage within the pericardium. Pericardial tumors may cause pericardial
friction rubs.
Intramyocardial symptoms and signs are caused by arrhythmias, usually atrioventricular or
intraventricular block or paroxysmal supraventricular or ventricular tachycardias due to compression or
encroachment on the conduction system (notably rhabdomyomas and fibromas).
 5/10

  
Intracavitary symptoms and signs are due to tumors that obstruct valvular function, blood flow, or
both (causing valvular stenosis, valvular insufficiency, or heart failure). Intracavitary symptoms and signs
may vary with body position, which can alter hemodynamics and physical forces associated with the
tumor.
Symptoms and signs by tumor type
Myxomas may manifest with the triad of heart failure, embolic disease, and constitutional symptoms.
Myxomas may cause a diastolic murmur that mimics the murmur of mitral stenosis but whose loudness
and location vary from beat to beat with body position. About 15% of pedunculated left atrial myxomas
produce an audible “tumor plop” as they drop into the mitral orifice during diastole (1). Myxomas may
also cause arrhythmias. Raynaud syndrome and finger clubbing are less typical but may occur.
Fibroelastomas, often discovered incidentally at autopsy, are usually asymptomatic; however, they
may be a source of systemic emboli.
Rhabdomyomas are usually asymptomatic.
Fibromas cause arrhythmias, possibly causing sudden death, and obstructive symptoms.
Hemangiomas are usually asymptomatic but may cause any of the extracardiac, intramyocardial, or
intracavitary symptoms.
Teratomas cause respiratory distress and cyanosis due to compression of the aortic and pulmonary
artery, or SVC syndrome due to compression of the superior vena cava.
Symptoms and signs of malignant cardiac tumors are more acute in onset and progress more rapidly
than those of benign tumors. Cardiac sarcomas most commonly cause symptoms of ventricular inflow
tract obstruction and cardiac tamponade. Mesothelioma causes symptoms of pericarditis or
tamponade. Primary lymphoma causes refractory progressive heart failure, tamponade, arrhythmias,
and SVC syndrome. Metastatic cardiac tumors may manifest as sudden cardiac enlargement,
tamponade (due to rapid accumulation of hemorrhagic pericardial effusion), heart block, other
arrhythmias, or sudden unexplained heart failure. Fever, malaise, weight loss, night sweats, and loss of
appetite may also be present.
Diagnosis of Cardiac Tumors
Echocardiography
Cardiac MRI
Cardiac CT
 6/10

  
PET scan
Biopsy
Diagnosis, which is often delayed because symptoms and signs mimic those of much more common
disorders, is confirmed by echocardiography. Transesophageal echocardiography is better for
visualizing atrial tumors, and transthoracic echocardiography is better for ventricular tumors. Due to its
superior temporal resolution, echocardiography is the imaging modality of choice in visualizing very
mobile cardiac tumors, particularly when they are small. Other imaging modalities are also used to
further characterize the tumor (1, 2).
Atrial Myxoma (Echocardiogram)
Cardiac MRI is the imaging modality of choice for tumor tissue characterization and provides the best
clues to tumor types.
 7/10

  
Atrial Myxoma (Cardiac MRI Scan)
Contrast-enhanced cardiac CT with its 3D acquisition and superior spatial resolution can provide more
detailed anatomic information compared to other techniques.
Positron emission tomography (PET) may provide the first evidence suggesting cardiac metastasis in
patients with extracardiac malignant tumors. However, PET may not be able to discriminate between
physiologic and pathologic uptake in cardiac tissues and cannot provide tissue characterization of the
tumor as well as MRI or CT do.
Biopsy is not usually done because imaging studies can often distinguish benign from malignant
tumors, and biopsy may inadvertently spread cancerous cells in patients with a malignant primary
tumor. In carefully selected patients, an echocardiography-guided percutaneous transcatheter biopsy
can be done without the need for open heart surgery and provides information that affects
management (3).
Extensive testing often precedes echocardiography in patients with myxomas because their symptoms
are nonspecific. Anemia; thrombocytopenia; and elevation of white blood cell count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and gamma-globulins are common. ECG may show left atrial
enlargement. Routine chest radiographs may show calcium deposits in right atrial myxomas or in
teratomas seen as anterior mediastinal masses. Myxomas are sometimes diagnosed when tumor cells
are found in a surgically removed embolus.
Arrhythmias and heart failure in patients with features of tuberous sclerosis suggest rhabdomyomas or
fibromas. New cardiac symptoms and signs in a patient with a known extracardiac cancer suggest
cardiac metastases. Chest radiographs may show bizarre changes in the cardiac silhouette.
Treatment of Cardiac Tumors
Benign primary: Excision
Malignant primary: Palliation
Metastatic: Depends on tumor origin
Treatment can involve excision, palliation, and/or other measures (1).
Treatment of benign primary tumors is surgical excision followed by serial echocardiography over 5 to
6 years to monitor for recurrence. Tumors are excised unless another disorder (eg, dementia)
contraindicates surgery. Surgery is usually curative (eg, in one series, survival rates of 96% at 1 year,
83% at 5 years, and 75% at 10 years [2]). Exceptions are rhabdomyomas, most of which regress
spontaneously and do not require treatment, and pericardial teratoma, which may require urgent
pericardiocentesis. Patients with fibroelastoma may also require valvular repair or replacement. When
rhabdomyomas or fibromas are multifocal, surgical excision is usually ineffective, and prognosis is poor
after the first year of life; survival at 5 years may be very low.
Chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy are seldom indicated for benign primary cardiac tumors. In
carefully selected patients, heart transplantation may be considered if the tumor is considered
unresectable (3). Reports have also highlighted the feasibility of autotransplantation (a procedure that
involves explantation of the heart, tumor resection, heart reconstruction, and reimplantation of the
reconstructed heart) in carefully selected patients with complex tumors (ie, not easily excised in situ)
and in experienced centers (4).
Treatment of malignant primary tumors is usually palliative (eg, radiation therapy, chemotherapy,
management of complications) because prognosis is poor.
Treatment of metastatic cardiac tumors depends on tumor origin. It may include systemic
chemotherapy or palliation.
Key Points
Most cardiac tumors are metastatic, most commonly from lung and breast carcinoma,
melanoma, soft-tissue sarcoma, and renal carcinoma.
Primary cardiac tumors are much less common; most originate in the myocardium or
endocardium, but they can develop in any cardiac tissue and be benign or malignant.
Manifestations depend on the location and type of tumor but include constitutional
symptoms, valvular or inflow-outflow tract obstruction, thromboembolism, and
arrhythmias.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography, and frequently other cardiac imaging (eg, MRI, CT,
PET).
For benign tumors, treatment is excision; for malignant primary and most metastatic
tumors, treatment is palliative.
