=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:43.453290",
  "file_size_bytes": 297988,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic
Syndrome
By James D. Douketis, MD, McMaster University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023
Chronic venous insufficiency is impaired venous return, sometimes causing
lower extremity discomfort, edema, and skin changes. Post-thrombotic
(postphlebitic ) syndrome is symptomatic chronic venous insufficiency after
deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Causes of chronic venous insufficiency are
disorders that result in venous hypertension, usually through venous damage
or incompetence of venous valves, as occurs (for example) after DVT. Diagnosis
is by history, physical examination, and duplex ultrasonography. Treatment is
compression, wound care, and, rarely, surgery. Prevention requires adequate
treatment of DVT and compression stockings.
Prevalence estimates of chronic venous insufficiency vary widely, reflecting differences in the study
populations (1). Post-thrombotic syndrome may affect up to 50% of patients with deep venous
thrombosis (DVT), and can have a substantial effect on quality of life. Post-thrombotic syndrome can
range in severity from mild leg swelling to debilitating venous leg ulcers; 20 to 35% of patients will
develop moderate to severe disease. Post-thrombotic syndrome is more common in patients with more
extensive DVT, such as those with involvement of the common femoral and/or iliofemoral veins (2).
General references
1. Galanaud JP, Monreal M, Kahn SR. Epidemiology of the post-thrombotic syndrome. Thromb Res
2018;164:100-109. doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2017.07.026
2. Rabinovich A, Kahn SR. How I treat the postthrombotic syndrome. Blood 2018;131(20):2215-
2222. doi:10.1182/blood-2018-01-785956
Etiology of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Venous return from the lower extremities relies on contraction of calf muscles to push blood from
intramuscular (soleal) sinusoids and gastrocnemius veins into and through deep veins. Venous valves
direct blood proximally to the heart. Chronic venous insufficiency occurs when venous obstruction (eg,
 1/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
in DVT), venous valvular insufficiency, or decreased contraction of muscles surrounding the veins (eg,
due to immobility) decrease forward venous flow and increase venous pressure (venous hypertension).
Fluid accumulation in the lower extremities (eg, in right heart failure) can also contribute by causing
venous hypertension. Prolonged venous hypertension causes tissue edema, inflammation, and hypoxia,
leading to symptoms. Pressure may be transmitted to superficial veins if valves in perforator veins,
which connect deep and superficial veins, are ineffective.
The most common risk factor for chronic venous insufficiency is
Deep venous thrombosis
Other risk factors include
Trauma
Older age
Obesity
Sitting or standing for long periods
Pregnancy
Idiopathic cases are often attributed to a history of occult DVT.
Post-thrombotic syndrome is symptomatic chronic venous insufficiency that follows DVT. Risk factors
for post-thrombotic syndrome in patients with DVT include proximal thrombosis, recurrent ipsilateral
2
DVT, and body mass index (BMI) ≥ 22 kg/m . Age, female sex, and estrogen therapy are also associated
with the syndrome.
Symptoms and Signs of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Clinically evident chronic venous insufficiency may not cause any symptoms but always causes signs;
post-thrombotic syndrome always causes symptoms. Both disorders are a concern because their
symptoms can mimic those of acute DVT and both can lead to substantial reductions in physical activity
and quality of life.
Symptoms include a sense of fullness, heaviness, aching, cramps, pain, tiredness, and paresthesias in
the legs; these symptoms worsen with standing or walking and are relieved by rest and elevation.
Pruritus may accompany skin changes. Signs occur along a continuum: no changes to varicose veins
(rare) to edema to stasis dermatitis on the lower legs and at the ankles, with or without ulceration (see
table Clinical Classification of Chronic Venous Insufficiency). The calf may be painful when compressed.
TABLE
Clinical Classification of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Class Signs
 2/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Class Signs
0 No signs of venous disease
1 Ectatic or reticular veins*
2 Varicose veins*
3 Edema
Skin changes due to venous stasis (eg,
4 pigmentation, induration,
lipodermatosclerosis)
Skin changes due to venous stasis and
5
healed ulceration
Skin changes due to venous stasis and
6
active ulceration
* May occur idiopathically without chronic venous insufficiency.
Venous stasis dermatitis consists of erythema, hyperpigmentation, induration, venous ectasia,
lipodermatosclerosis (fibrosing subcutaneous panniculitis), lichenification, and venous stasis ulcers.
Erythema may be difficult to appreciate in dark skin.
 3/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Stasis Dermatitis (Chronic Changes)
Hide Details
Chronic stasis dermatitis may appear as fibrotic skin thickening and hyperpigmentation. The
changes are characteristic in both light skin (top) and dark skin (bottom), here appearing more
pronounced in the bottom photo.
Images provided by Thomas Habif, MD.
Venous stasis ulcers may develop spontaneously or after affected skin is scratched or injured. They
typically occur around the medial malleolus, tend to be shallow and moist, and may be malodorous
(especially when poorly cared for) or painful. They do not penetrate the deep fascia. In contrast, ulcers
due to peripheral arterial disease eventually expose tendons or bone.
Venous Stasis Ulcer Manifestations
 4/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Early Venous Stasis Ulcer
Venous stasis includes lichenification and hyperpigmentation. A shallow ulcer is developing superior to the
medial malleolus.
© Springer Science+Business Media
Large Venous Stasis Ulcer
This large venous stasis ulcer is surrounded by brawny induration.
© Springer Science+Business Media
Stasis Dermatitis (Ulcer)
Venous stasis ulcers develop as a result of inadequately treated stasis dermatitis; they may quickly follow
the first signs of stasis dermatitis.
Image provided by Thomas Habif, MD.
Healed Venous Stasis Ulcer
 5/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Roberto A. Penne-Casanova/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Leg edema tends to be unilateral or asymmetric; bilateral symmetric edema is more likely to result from
a systemic disorder (eg, heart failure, hypoalbuminemia) or certain medications (eg, calcium channel
blockers).
In general, unless the lower extremities are adequately cared for, patients with any manifestation of
chronic venous insufficiency or post-thrombotic syndrome are at risk of progression to more advanced
forms.
Diagnosis of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Clinical evaluation
Ultrasonography to exclude DVT
Diagnosis is usually based on history and physical examination. A clinical scoring system that ranks 5
symptoms (pain, cramps, heaviness, pruritus, paresthesia) and 6 signs (edema, hyperpigmentation,
induration, venous ectasia, blanching hyperemia, pain with calf compression) on a scale of 0 (absent or
minimal) to 3 (severe) is increasingly recognized as a standard diagnostic tool of disease severity (1).
Scores of 5 to 14 on 2 visits separated by ≥ 6 months indicate mild-to-moderate disease, and scores of ≥
15 indicate severe disease.
Lower-extremity duplex ultrasonography reliably excludes or confirms DVT. Absence of edema and a
reduced ankle-brachial index suggest peripheral arterial disease rather than chronic venous
insufficiency and post-thrombotic syndrome.
Diagnosis reference
1. Kahn SR. Measurement properties of the Villalta scale to define and classify the severity of the
post-thrombotic syndrome. J Thromb Haemost 2009;7(5):884-888. doi:10.1111/j.1538-
7836.2009.03339.x
Treatment of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Elevation
Compression using bandages, stockings, and/or pneumatic devices
Topical treatments
Treatment of secondary infection, when present
Some experts believe that weight loss, regular exercise, and reduction of dietary sodium may benefit
patients with bilateral chronic venous insufficiency. However, all interventions may be difficult to
implement.
Elevating the leg above the level of the right atrium decreases venous hypertension and edema, is
appropriate for all patients, and should be done a minimum of 3 times a day for ≥ 30 minutes. However,
 6/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
most patients cannot reliably adhere to this schedule during the day.
Compression is recommended for treatment and prevention of the effects of chronic venous
insufficiency (ie, edema, venous ulcers) and is indicated for all patients. Although the data are mixed as
to whether compression stockings prevent post-thrombotic syndrome, they are useful to reduce
symptoms of swelling, pain, and tightness that may occur after deep vein thrombosis (1).
Elastic bandages are used initially until edema and ulcers resolve and leg size stabilizes; commercial
compression stockings are then used. Stockings that provide 20 to 30 mm Hg of distal circumferential
pressure are indicated for smaller varicose veins and mild chronic venous insufficiency; 30 to 40 mm Hg
is indicated for larger varicose veins and moderate to severe disease. Infrequently, higher compression
pressures (eg, > 40 mm Hg) can be used but may not be tolerated for long-term use.
Stockings should be put on when patients awaken, before leg edema worsens with activity, and should
exert maximal pressure at the ankles and gradually less pressure proximally. Adherence to this
treatment varies; many patients consider stockings irritating, restricting, or cosmetically undesirable;
many patients have difficulty putting them on.
Intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) uses a pump to cyclically inflate and deflate hollow plastic
leggings. IPC provides external compression, squeezing blood and fluid out of the lower legs. It
effectively treats severe post-thrombotic syndrome and venous stasis ulcers but may be no more
effective than compression stockings alone and is much less practical for patients to adhere to on an
ongoing basis.
Topical wound care is important in venous stasis ulcer management. When an Unna boot (zinc oxide–
impregnated bandages) is properly applied, covered by compression bandages, and changed weekly,
almost all ulcers heal. Occlusive dressings (eg, hydrocolloids such as aluminum chloride) provide a moist
environment for wound healing and promote growth of new tissue; they may be used for ulcers with
light to moderate exudate, but they probably add little to simple Unna bandaging. Dry dressings are
absorptive, making them most appropriate for heavier exudate.
Medications have no role in routine treatment of chronic venous insufficiency, although many patients
are given aspirin, topical corticosteroids, diuretics for edema, or antibiotics.
Surgery (eg, venous ligation, stripping, valve reconstruction) is also typically ineffective. Grafting
autologous skin or skin created from epidermal keratinocytes or dermal fibroblasts may be an option
for patients with stasis ulcers refractory to all other measures (2); however, there is a risk that the graft
may reulcerate, especially if there is ongoing venous hypertension.
Treatment references
1. Kahn SR, Comerota AJ, Cushman M, et al. The postthrombotic syndrome: evidence-based
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment strategies: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association [published correction appears in Circulation. 2015 Feb 24;131(8):e359]. Circulation
2014;130(18):1636-1661. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000130
 7/8

 Chronic Venous Insufficiency and Post-Thrombotic Syndrome - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
2. Jones JE, Nelson EA, Al-Hity A. Skin grafting for venous leg ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2013;2013(1):CD001737. Published 2013 Jan 31. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001737.pub4
Prevention of Chronic Venous Insufficiency
Primary prevention of chronic venous insufficiency involves adequate anticoagulation after DVT and use
of compression stockings for up to 2 years after DVT or lower extremity venous trauma. However, a
meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing compression stockings with placebo (ie, either none or
sham-compression stockings) failed to show a significant reduction in post-thrombotic syndrome (1).
Lifestyle changes (eg, weight loss, regular exercise, reduction of dietary sodium) can decrease risk by
decreasing lower extremity venous pressure.
Prevention reference
1. Subbiah R, Aggarwal V, Zhao H, Kolluri R, Chatterjee S, Bashir R. Effect of compression stockings
on post thrombotic syndrome in patients with deep vein thrombosis: a meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Haematol 2016;3(6):e293-e300. doi:10.1016/S2352-
3026(16)30017-5
Key Points
Skin changes range on a continuum from normal skin or mildly ectatic veins to severe
stasis dermatitis and ulceration.
Symptoms are more common with post-thrombotic syndrome and include heaviness,
aching, and paresthesias.
Diagnosis is based on inspection, but patients should have ultrasonography to rule out
deep venous thrombosis.
Treatment is with elevation and compression; medications and surgery are typically
ineffective.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 8/8
