=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:50.554540",
  "file_size_bytes": 1732984,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database
does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National
Institutes of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
BMJ. 2002 May 18;324(7347):1201–1204. doi: 10.1136/bmj.324.7347.1201
Conditions affecting the right side of the heart
Richard A Harrigan, Kevin Jones
Article notes Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC1123164 PMID: 12016190
Many diseases of the right side of the heart are associated with electrocardiographic abnormalities.
Electrocardiography is neither a sensitive nor specific tool for diagnosing conditions such as right
atrial enlargement, right ventricular hypertrophy, or pulmonary hypertension. However, an awareness
of the electrocardiographic abnormalities associated with these conditions may support the patient's
clinical assessment and may prevent the changes on the electrocardiogram from being wrongly
attributed to other conditions, such as ischaemia.
This article discusses right atrial enlargement, right ventricular hypertrophy, and the
electrocardiographic changes associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
pulmonary embolus, acute right heart strain, and valvular heart disease
Right atrial enlargement
The forces generated by right atrial depolarisation are directed anteriorly and inferiorly and produce
the early part of the P wave. Right atrial hypertrophy or dilatation is therefore associated with tall P
 1/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
waves in the anterior and inferior leads, though the overall duration of the P wave is not usually
prolonged. A tall P wave (height ⩾2.5 mm) in leads II, III, and aVF is known as the P pulmonale.
Diagnostic criteria for right ventricular hypertrophy
(Provided the QRS duration is less than 0.12 s)
Right axis deviation of +110° or more
Dominant R wave in lead V1
⩾
R wave in lead V1 7 mm
Supporting criteria
ST segment depression and T wave inversion in leads V1 to V4
Deep S waves in leads V5, V6, I, and aVL
The electrocardiographic changes suggesting right atrial enlargement often correlate poorly with the
clinical and pathological findings. Right atrial enlargement is associated with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, pulmonary hypertension, and congenital heart disease—for example, pulmonary
stenosis and tetralogy of Fallot. In practice, most cases of right atrial enlargement are associated with
right ventricular hypertrophy, and this may be reflected in the electrocardiogram. The
electrocardiographic features of right atrial enlargement without coexisting right ventricular
hypertrophy are seen in patients with tricuspid stenosis. P pulmonale may appear transiently in
patients with acute pulmonary embolism.
Right ventricular hypertrophy
The forces generated by right ventricular depolarisation are directed rightwards and anteriorly and
are almost completely masked by the dominant forces of left ventricular depolarisation. In the
presence of right ventricular hypertrophy the forces of depolarisation increase, and if the hypertrophy
is severe these forces may dominate on the electrocardiogram.
Right ventricular hypertrophy is associated with pulmonary hypertension, mitral
stenosis, and, less commonly, conditions such as pulmonary stenosis and congenital
heart disease
 2/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
The electrocardiogram is a relatively insensitive indicator of the presence of right ventricular
hypertrophy, and in mild cases of right ventricular hypertrophy the trace will be normal.
Conditions associated with tall R wave in lead V1
Right ventricular hypertrophy
Posterior myocardial infarction
Type A Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Right bundle branch block
A tall R wave in lead V1 is normal in children and young adults
Lead V1 lies closest to the right ventricular myocardium and is therefore best placed to detect the
changes of right ventricular hypertrophy, and a dominant R wave in lead V1 is observed. The
increased rightward forces are reflected in the limb leads, in the form of right axis deviation.
Secondary changes may be observed in the right precordial chest leads, where ST segment depression
and T wave inversion are seen.
Conditions associated with right axis deviation
Right ventricular hypertrophy
Left posterior hemiblock
Lateral myocardial infarction
Acute right heart strain
Right axis deviation is normal in infants and children
A dominant R wave in lead V1 can occur in other conditions, but the absence of right axis deviation
allows these conditions to be differentiated from right ventricular hypertrophy. Isolated right axis
deviation is also associated with a range of conditions.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
 3/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hyperinflation of the lungs leads to depression of the
diaphragm, and this is associated with clockwise rotation of the heart along its longitudinal axis. This
clockwise rotation means that the transitional zone (defined as the progression of rS to qR in the
chest leads) shifts towards the left with persistence of an rS pattern as far as V5 or even V6. This may
give rise to a “pseudoinfarct” pattern, with deep S waves in the right precordial leads simulating the
appearance of the QS waves and poor R wave progression seen in anterior myocardial infarction. The
amplitude of the QRS complexes may be small in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
as the hyperinflated lungs are poor electrical conductors.
About three quarters of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease have
electrocardiographic abnormalities. P pulmonale is often but not invariably present and
may occur with or without clinical evidence of cor pulmonale
In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease the electrocardiographic signs of right
ventricular hypertrophy may be present, indicating the presence of cor pulmonale
Cardiac arrhythmias may occur in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, particularly in
association with an acute respiratory tract infection, respiratory failure, or pulmonary embolism.
Arrhythmias are sometimes the result of the underlying disease process but may also occur as side
effects of the drugs used to treat the disease.
The arrhythmias are mostly supraventricular in origin and include atrial extrasystoles, atrial
fibrillation or flutter, and multifocal atrial tachycardia. Ventricular extrasystoles and ventricular
tachycardia may also occur.
Acute pulmonary embolism
The electrocardiographic features of acute pulmonary embolism depend on the size of the embolus
and its haemodynamic effects and on the underlying cardiopulmonary reserve of the patient. The
timing and frequency of the electrocardiographic recording is also important as changes may be
transient. Patients who present with a small pulmonary embolus are likely to have a normal
electrocardiogram or a trace showing only sinus tachycardia.
 4/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Right ventricular dilatation may lead to right sided conduction delays, which manifest
as incomplete or complete right bundle branch block. There may be some rightward
shift of the frontal plane QRS axis.Right atrial dilatation may lead to prominent P waves
in the inferior leads. Atrial arrhythmias including flutter and fibrillation are common,
and T wave inversion in the right precordial leads may also occur
If the embolus is large and associated with pulmonary artery obstruction, acute right ventricular
dilatation may occur. This may produce an S wave in lead I and a Q wave in lead III. T wave
inversion in lead III may also be present, producing the well known S1, Q3, T3 pattern.
The S1, Q3, T3 pattern is seen in about 12% of patients with a massive pulmonary
embolus
Acute right heart strain
When the electrocardiogram shows features of right ventricular hypertrophy accompanied by ST
segment depression and T wave inversion, a ventricular “strain” pattern is said to exist. Ventricular
strain is seen mainly in leads V1 and V2. The mechanism is unclear. A strain pattern is sometimes
seen in acute massive pulmonary embolism but is also seen in patients with right ventricular
hypertrophy in the absence of any detectable stress on the ventricle. Both pneumothorax and massive
pleural effusion with acute right ventricular dilatation may also produce a strain pattern.
Electrocardiographic abnormalities found in acute pulmonary embolism
Sinus tachycardia
Atrial flutter or fibrillation
S1, Q3, T3 pattern
Right bundle branch block (incomplete or complete)
T wave inversion in the right precordial leads
P pulmonale
Right axis deviation
 5/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Right sided valvular problems
Tricuspid stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis is a rare disorder and is usually associated with rheumatic heart disease. It appears
in the electrocardiogram as P pulmonale. It generally occurs in association with mitral valve disease,
and therefore the electrocardiogram often shows evidence of biatrial enlargement, indicated by a
large biphasic P wave in lead V1 with an initial positive deflection followed by a terminal negative
deflection.
Tricuspid regurgitation
The electrocardiogram is an unhelpful tool for diagnosing tricuspid regurgitation and generally shows
the features of the underlying cardiac disease. The electrocardiographic manifestations of tricuspid
regurgitation are non-specific and include incomplete right bundle branch block and atrial
fibrillation.
Pulmonary stenosis
Pulmonary stenosis leads to pressure overload in the right atrium and ventricle. The
electrocardiogram may be completely normal in the presence of mild pulmonary stenosis. More
severe lesions are associated with electrocardiographic features of right atrial and ventricular
hypertrophy, with tall P waves, marked right axis deviation, and a tall R wave in lead V1.
 6/15

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Large P waves in leads II, III, and aVF (P pulmonale)
 7/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Right ventricular hypertrophy secondary to pulmonary stenosis (note the dominant R wave
in lead V1, presence of right atrial hypertrophy, right axis deviation, and T wave inversion in
leads V1 to V3)
 8/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (note the P pulmonale, low amplitude QRS
complexes, and poor R wave progression)
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Multifocal atrial tachycardia
 9/15
🔍
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Sinus tachycardia and S1, Q3, T3 pattern in patient with pulmonary embolus
 10/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Preoperative electrocardiogram in otherwise healthy 38 year old man
 11/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Acute pulmonary embolism: 10 days postoperatively the same patient developed acute
dyspnoea and hypotension (note the T wave inversion in the right precordial leads and lead
III)
 12/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
S1, Q3, T3 pattern and right bundle branch block in patient with pulmonary embolus
 13/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Example of right heart strain: right ventricular hypertrophy with widespread T wave
inversion in chest leads
 14/15
🔍

 Conditions affecting the right side of the heart - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Biatrial abnormality
Footnotes
Kevin Jones is consultant chest physician at Bolton Royal Hospital. Richard A Harrigan is associate
professor of emergency medicine at Temple University School of Medicine and associate research
director, division of emergency medicine, Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
The ABC of clinical electrocardiography is edited by Francis Morris, consultant in emergency
medicine at the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield; June Edhouse, consultant in emergency
medicine, Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport; William J Brady, associate professor, programme
director, and vice chair, department of emergency medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA, USA; and John Camm, professor of clinical cardiology, St George's Hospital Medical School,
London. The series will be published as a book in the summer.
Articles from BMJ : British Medical Journal are provided here courtesy of BMJ Publishing Group
 15/15
🔍
