=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Congestive heart failure overview - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:17.939492",
  "file_size_bytes": 736020,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Congestive heart failure overview - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Congestive heart failure overview
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com);
Associate Editor(s)-in-Chief: Syed Hassan A. Kazmi BSc, MD [2] (mailto:skazmi@bidmc.harv
ard.edu)
Overview
Heart failure is a complex syndrome whereby there is inadequate output of the heart to meet the
metabolic demands of the body. Abnormal function of different anatomic parts of the heart cause
heart failure including the pericardium, the myocardium, the endocardium, the heart valves and
the great vessels. Symptoms of heart failure are due to a lack of both forward blood flow to the
body, and backward flow into the lungs. Heart failure is a clinical syndrome characterized by
symptoms of dyspnea, edema and fatigue and signs such as rales on physical examination. Heart
failure may be classified based on ejection fraction into heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction (HFpEF) and heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). LV remodeling is the
basic concept for HFpEF pathophysiolgy. Two models are emerging in HFpEF pathophysiology,
the traditional model discussed about ventricular diastolic dysfunction , LV hypertrophy, impaired
relaxation, endothelial dysfunction, arterial and ventricular stiffness and their effect on cardiac
function. The emerged model discussed role of systemic microvascular endothelial inflammation
due to existing comorbidities such as, diabetes, hypertension, obesity, smoking and ischemia in
cardiac remodeling and dysfunction. The pathogenesis of HFrEF is related largely to cellular
proliferation and metabolism. Pathological processes that result in progression of HF and are
common to both HFrEF and HFpEF are altered excitation-contraction coupling, epigenetic
modifications, changes in sarcomeric coupling proteins, increased adrenergic drive, increased
activity of renin-angiotensin aldosterone axis, nitric oxide insensitivity, adensoine triphosphate
(ATP) depletion, reactive oxygen species production and an elevated cell death rate. The causes of
heart failure can be broadly divided into cardiac and non-cardiac. Cardiac causes include aortic
regurgitation, aortic stenosis, arrhythmias, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia,
arteriovenous fistula, atrial fibrillation, atrial septal defect, cardiac amyloidosis, cardiac aneurysm,
congenital heart disease, constrictive pericarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, Eisenmenger
syndrome, endocarditis, hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypoplastic left heart
syndrome, interferon gamma, ischemic heart disease, malignant hypertension, mitral
regurgitation, mitral stenosis, myocardial infarction, oxaprozin, patent ductus arteriosus,
pericardial effusion, pericardial tamponade, pericarditis, peripartum cardiomyopathy,
pertuzumab, restrictive cardiomyopathy, rheumatic carditis, rupture of the papillary muscles,
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, tricuspid insufficiency, valvular heart disease, ventricular aneurysm,
ventricular septal defect. Congestive heart failure should be distinguished from other conditions
that cause dyspnea, fatigue and edema. Heart failure affects close to 5 million people in the the
United States of America and each year close to 500,000 new cases are diagnosed. Congestive
heart failure is responsible for a significant portion of the healthcare budget, and more than 50% of
patients seek re-admission within 6 months after treatment and the average duration of hospital
stay is 6 days. In 2005 the prevalence among adults aged 20 and older in the United States was
5,300,000 (about 2,650,000 males, and 2,650,000 females). Heart failure is associated with
significantly r Ce od ou kic ese hd
e
lp
p
h usy ds ei lc iva el
r
oa un
r
d
se
rm vice en s.t Ba yl uh sie na
g
l ot uh
r
,
s
er re vis cu esl ,t yi on ug
a
gi rn
e
ea
to
m oua
r
r uk see od
f
l cy
o
od kie ec s.reasOeKd quality of life.
 1/14

Congestive heart failure is also associated with a poor prognosis. If left untreated, heart failure may
result in death due to complications associated with the condition. Heart failure resulting from
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease has been shown to be associated with higher incidence of
fatal events compared to heart failure that results from other cardiac diseases. Heart failure is a
progressive disease with a major impact on the patient's quality of life. With the exception of heart
failure caused by reversible conditions, the condition usually worsens with time. Although some
people survive many years, progressive disease is associated with an overall annual mortality rate
of 10%. In the Framingham experience, 80% of men and 70% of women with heart failure who
were under 65 years of age had died within 8 years of the diagnosis. There are several diagnostic
criteria / algorithms that are used to diagnose heart failure including an algorithm from the ESC,
Framingham study, and Boston. The classic symptoms of heart failure include dyspnea, fatigue,
and fluid retention. Patients with heart failure present in different ways. Some patients present
with exercise intolerance but show little evidence of congestion or edema. Other patients present
with mild symptoms of edema and pulmonary congestion. The ejection fraction is usually below
35% in patients who are symptomatic with systolic heart failure. BNP levels may be useful in the
initial establishment of the diagnosis of heart failure in the patient with dyspnea of unclear
etiology. Chest x-ray in a patient with heart failure shows cardiomegaly (cardiac enlargement and
pulmonary congestion (Kerley B lines, and in some cases pleural effusion). CMR may be used for
assessment of LV and RV size and morphology, systolic and diastolic function, and for
characterizing myocardial tissue for the purpose of understanding the etiology of LV systolic or
diastolic dysfunction. Echocardiography is commonly used to diagnose and monitor the
progression of heart failure. This modality uses ultrasound to determine the stroke volume (SV, the
amount of blood in the heart that exits the ventricles with each beat), the end-diastolic volume
(EDV, the total amount of blood at the end of diastole), and the SV divided by the EDV, a value
known as the ejection fraction (EF). In pediatrics, the shortening fraction is the preferred measure
of systolic function. Coronary angiography is perfomred in patients with heart failure in whom
there is a suspicion of underlying atherosclerosis as the basis for the heart failure. Patients who are
troponin or CK-MB positive, who have dynamic EKG changes or other signs and symptoms of an
acute coronary syndrome who are revascularization candidates should undergo coronary
angiography. Acute heart failure can occur in the setting of a new onset heart failure or worsening
of an existing chronic heart failure (also known as acute decompensated heart failure, flash
pulmonary edema, ADHF). ADHF presents with acute shortness of breath due to the development
of pulmonary edema (the rapid accumulation of fluid in the lung). Other signs and symptoms of
ADHF include hypotension with impaired and organ perfusion manifested by worsening renal
function, altered mentation and cold clammy extremities. ADHF associated with a poor prognosis
if not treated aggressively. Like chronic heart failure therapy, the goal is to improve symptoms but
unlike chronic therapy the other goals are to improve oxygenation and hemodynamic stability. The
mainstays of the acute medical treatment in acute decompensated congestive heart failure include
oxygen to improve hypoxia, diuresis to reduce both preload and intravascular volume and
vasodilators to reduce afterload. Some of the mainstays of chronic heart failure therapy are not
initiated acutely (ACE inhibtors,beta blockers and digoxin). End of life care in the patient with
congestive heart failure is focused on making the patient comfortable. Invasive procedures should
be minimized, and patients may elect to have their defibrillators inactivated. The growing number
of patients with Stage IV heart failure (intractable symptoms of fatigue, shortness of breath or
chest pain at rest despite optimal medical therapy) should be considered for palliative care or
hospice.
Historical Perspective
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 2/14

Heart failure (HF) is known to be recognized as a disease since ancient times. Italian Egyptologist
Ernesto Schiaparelli reported the first case of decompensated heart failure (HF) in the remains of a
tomb in the Valley of the Queens over 3500 years ago the remains are now housed in the Egyptian
museum in Turin, Italy. They belonged to an Egyptian dignitary named Nebiri who lived under the
reign of the 18th dynasty Pharaoh Thutmose III (1479–24 BC). Various other features of HF such
as cardiac hypertrophy and coronary atherosclerosis were also known to Egyptians. In China, ‘the
Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine’ described edema as early as 2600 B.C. The
medieval Arab scholar Ibn Sina, known to the West as Avicenna (980–1037), had a reputation as
an authority on heart disease. His treatise entitled ‘Kitab al-Adviyt-al-Qalbiye’ or ‘The book on
drugs for cardiac diseases’ discusses therapies for difficulty in breathing, palpitation, and syncope.
Widely used in the West in a Latin translation in the 14th century, the treatise remains in the
Galenic tradition of humours. In 1628 when William Harvey clearly described circulation and
elucidated hemodynamic abnormalities occurring in HF. Röntgen discovered x-rays in 1895 and
allowed a more thorough understanding of maladaptive changes occurring in HF patients.In the
1940s and 1960s the advent of cardiac catheterization and cardiac surgery furthered our
understanding of HF. The 1960s was also the decade that saw the emergence of LV assist devices
(LVADs), beginning in 1961 when Dennis and co-workers uses a roller pump to assist the left
ventricle. From the mid-1970s, the availability of vasodilators provided a means to reduce afterload
in order to increase cardiac efficiency and cardiac output in HF
Classification
Several classification schemes are used to characterize heart failure based on:
• The pathophysiology of heart failure (systolic vs diastolic; left vs right; low output vs high
output)
• The chronicity of heart failure (acute vs chronic)
• The severity of heart failure (the NY Heart Association Class)
• The stage of congestive heart failure (AHA Class A,B,C,D)
• The most recent classification according to the left ventricular ejection fraction; heart failure
with reduced ejection fraction(HFrEF) vs heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)[1]
Pathophysiology
Heart failure is a complex syndrome whereby there is inadequate output of the heart to meet the
metabolic demands of the body. Heart failure is caused by abnormal function of different anatomic
parts of the heart including the pericardium, the myocardium, the endocardium, the heart valves
and the great vessels. Heart failure is characterized by decreased cardiac output but not necessarily
decreased ejection fraction. Symptoms of heart failure are due to a lack of both forward blood flow
to the body, and backward flow into the lungs. The body tries to compensate for the low cardiac
output by mechanisms that increase the preload and afterload. These mechanisms lead to
exacerbation of the cardiac malfunction and symptoms associated with heart failure. LV
remodeling is the basic concept for HFpEF pathophysiolgy. Two models are emerging in HFpEF
pathophysiology, the traditional model discussed about ventricular diastolic dysfunction , LV
hypertrophy, impaired relaxation, endothelial dysfunction, arterial and ventricular stiffness and
their effect on cardiac function. The emerged model discussed role of systemic microvascular
endothelial inflammation due to existing comorbidities such as, diabetes, hypertension, obesity,
smoking and ischemia in cardiac remodeling and dysfunction. The pathogenesis of HFrEF is
related largely to cellular proliferation and metabolism. Pathological processes that result in
progression oCf oHokFie sa hneldp uas rdeel icveorm oumr soernvi cteos. bByo utshin Hg oFurr sEeFrv icaens,d y oHu aFgrpeEe tFo oaurr eu sae lotfe croeokdie es.xcitation-contraction
 3/14

coupling, epigenetic modifications, changes in sarcomeric coupling proteins, increased adrenergic
drive, increased activity of renin-angiotensin aldosterone axis, nitric oxide insensitivity, adensoine
triphosphate (ATP) depletion, reactive oxygen species production and an elevated cell death rate.
Causes
The causes of heart failure can be broadly divided into cardiac and non-cardiac. Cardiac causes
include aortic regurgitation, aortic stenosis, arrhythmias, arrhythmogenic right ventricular
dysplasia, arteriovenous fistula, atrial fibrillation, atrial septal defect, cardiac amyloidosis, cardiac
aneurysm, congenital heart disease, constrictive pericarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy,
Eisenmenger syndrome, endocarditis, hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypoplastic
left heart syndrome, interferon gamma, ischemic heart disease, malignant hypertension, mitral
regurgitation, mitral stenosis, myocardial infarction, oxaprozin, patent ductus arteriosus,
pericardial effusion, pericardial tamponade, pericarditis, peripartum cardiomyopathy,
pertuzumab, restrictive cardiomyopathy, rheumatic carditis, rupture of the papillary muscles,
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, tricuspid insufficiency, valvular heart disease, ventricular aneurysm,
ventricular septal defect.
Differentiating Heart Failure From Other Diseases
Congestive heart failure should be distinguished from other conditions that cause dyspnea, fatigue
and edema.
Epidemiology and Demographics
Heart failure affects close to 5 million people in the the United States of America and each year
close to 500,000 new cases are diagnosed. Congestive heart failure is responsible for a significant
portion of the healthcare budget, and more than 50% of patients seek re-admission within 6
months after treatment and the average duration of hospital stay is 6 days. In 2005 the prevalence
among adults aged 20 and older in the United States was 5,300,000 (about 2,650,000 males, and
2,650,000 females).
Risk Factors
Several risk factors may predispose to heart failure. These risk factors can be demographic, genetic,
associated with lifestyle or medications.
Screening
There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine screening for heart failure.
Natural History, Complications And Prognosis
Heart failure is associated with significantly reduced physical and mental health, resulting in a
markedly decreased quality of life. Congestive heart failure is also associated with a poor prognosis.
If left untreated, heart failure may result in death due to complications associated with the
condition. Heart failure resulting from atherosclerotic coronary artery disease has been shown to
be associated with higher incidence of fatal events compared to heart failure that results from other
cardiac diseases. Heart failure is a progressive disease with a major impact on the patient's quality
of life. With the exception of heart failure caused by reversible conditions, the condition usually
worsens with time. Although some people survive many years, progressive disease is associated
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 4/14

with an overall annual mortality rate of 10%. In the Framingham experience, 80% of men and 70%
of women with heart failure who were under 65 years of age had died within 8 years of the
diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis of Causes of Heart Failure Segregated by Left and
Right Sided Heart Failure
Left Ventricular Failure
Most Common Causes:
• Aortic regurgitation
• Aortic stenosis
• Hypertension
• Mitral regurgitation
• Myocardial ischemia
Expanded List of Causes:
• Atrial fibrillation
• Alcoholism
• Anemia
• Angina
• Aortic regurgitation
• Aortic Stenosis
• Arteriovenous fistula
• Beriberi
• Cardiac aneurysm
• Cardiomyopathy
• Constrictive pericarditis
• Drugs, toxins
• Hypertension
• Hyperthyroidism
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Mediastinal tumors
• Mitral Regurgitation
• Myocardial Infarction
• Paget's Disease
• Pancoast's Tumor
• Pericardial effusion
• Pericardial tamponade
• Perimyocarditis
• Protein deficiency
• Restrictive cardiomyopathy
• Rupture of the papillary muscles
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 5/14

• Sepsis
• Superior vena cava syndrome
Right Ventricular Failure
Most Common Causes:
• Cardiomyopathy
• Cor pulmonale
• Diffuse myocarditis
• Left heart failure
Other Causes:
• After left ventricular failure
• After pulmonary resection
• Allergic alveolitis
• Bronchial asthma
• Chronic bronchitis
• Honeycomb lung
• Hyperglobulia
• Emphysema
• Mitral Stenosis
• Right ventricular myocardial infarction
• Pickwickian Syndrome
• Pleural fibrosis
• Pneumoconiosis
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• Pulmonic regurgitation
• Pulmonic stenosis
• Sarcoidosis
• Severe relapsing pulmonary emboli
• Silicosis
• Tachycardia
• Tricuspid insufficiency
Others
• Ascorbic acid deficiency
• Cardiac amyloidosis
• Carnitine deficiency
• Cervical vein stasis of non-cardiac genesis
• Congenital heart disease
• Cyanosis of non-cardiac genesis
• Diabetes Mellitus
• Dyspnea of non-cardiac genesis
• Edema ofC noooknie-sc haerlpd uias cde gliveenr oeusri sservices. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 6/14

• Hemochromatosis
• Pleural effusion of non-cardiac genesis
• Pulmonary edema of non-cardiac genesis
• Thiamine deficiency
• Thyroid disease
Diagnosis
Clinical assessment
There are several diagnostic criteria / algorithms that are used to diagnose heart failure including
an algorithm from the ESC, Framingham study, and Boston.
History and symptoms
The classic symptoms of heart failure include dyspnea, fatigue, and fluid retention. Patients with
heart failure present in different ways. Some patients present with exercise intolerance but show
little evidence of congestion or edema. Other patients present with mild symptoms of edema and
pulmonary congestion. The ejection fraction is usually below 35% in patients who are symptomatic
with systolic heart failure.
Physical examination
Physical examination is of utmost important in the suspicion, diagnosis and follow up of heart
failure. Focus should be targeted mainly on the evaluation of the fluid status, blood pressure and
weight changes.
Laboratory findings
Once the diagnosis of heart failure is made, subsequent laboratory studies should be directed
toward the identification of an underlying cause of heart failure. Laboratory tests used for
diagnosis and monitor disease activity include renal function tests, thyroid function tests, serum
BNP levels and serum CA-125 levels. BNP levels may be useful in the initial establishment of the
diagnosis of heart failure in the patient with dyspnea of unclear etiology. In a meta-analysis, BNP
was superior N-terminal pro-BNP (NTproBNP) and was associated with a sensitivity of 85% and
specificity of 84% in the diagnosis of heart failure in the primary care setting. Once the diagnosis of
heart failure is made, subsequent laboratory studies should be directed toward the identification of
an underlying cause of heart failure. Renal function should be assessed as a rough guide to the
patient's intravascular volume status and renal perfusion. A urinalysis is helpful in the assessment
of the patient's volume status. Electrolyte assessment and the correction of electrolyte disturbances
such as hypokalemia, hyperkalemia and hypomagnesemia is critical in those patients treated with
diuretics. Hyponatremia (due to poor stimulation of the baroreceptors and appropriate ADH
release and free water retention) is associated with a poor prognosis.
Electrocardiogram
Although there is no diagnostic criteria of congestive heart failure on the EKG, there may be signs
of the underlying cardiac cause(s) of congestive heart failure. The EKG often shows low QRS
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
voltage. Other changes associated with HF include ventricular hypertrophy, atrial enlargement,
 7/14

poor R wave progression, left bundle branch block.
Chest X-ray
Chest x-ray in a patient with heart failure shows cardiomegaly (cardiac enlargement and
pulmonary congestion (Kerley B lines, and in some cases pleural effusion)
MRI
CMR may be used for assessment of LV and RV size and morphology, systolic and diastolic
function, and for characterizing myocardial tissue for the purpose of understanding the etiology of
LV systolic or diastolic dysfunction. The writing committee recognizes the potential capabilities of
spectroscopic techniques for acquiring metabolic information of the heart when evaluating
individuals with heart failure.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is commonly used to diagnose and monitor the progression of heart failure. This
modality uses ultrasound to determine the stroke volume (SV, the amount of blood in the heart
that exits the ventricles with each beat), the end-diastolic volume (EDV, the total amount of blood
at the end of diastole), and the SV divided by the EDV, a value known as the ejection fraction (EF).
In pediatrics, the shortening fraction is the preferred measure of systolic function.
Exercise stress test
Exercise stress testing with an assessment of oxygen consumption is useful in assessing the
functional capacity of the heart failure patient. Angiography can exclude the presence of an
ischemic basis for the disease, and cardiac catheterization can evaluate the hemodynamic basis of
heart failure and the response to drug. Myocardial viability studies can determine whether
hypocontractile myocardium is viable but just hibernating, and could therefore benefit from
revascularization.
Myocardial viability studies
Myocardial viability studies can determine whether hypocontractile myocardium is viable but just
hibernating, and could therefore benefit from revascularization.
Cardiac catheterization
Coronary angiography is perfomred in patients with heart failure in whom there is a suspicion of
underlying atherosclerosis as the basis for the heart failure. Patients who are troponin or CK-MB
positive, who have dynamic EKG changes or other signs and symptoms of an acute coronary
syndrome who are revascularization candidates should undergo coronary angiography.
Invasive hemodynamic monitoring
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 8/14

Based upon the results of the ESCAPE trial, there is no benefit in clinical outcomes associated with
the routine use of a pulmonary artery line in patients with decompensated CHF.
Treatment
Acute Treatment
Acute heart failure can occur in the setting of a new onset heart failure or worsening of an existing
chronic heart failure (also known as acute decompensated heart failure, flash pulmonary edema,
ADHF). ADHF presents with acute shortness of breath due to the development of pulmonary
edema (the rapid accumulation of fluid in the lung). Other signs and symptoms of ADHF include
hypotension with impaired and organ perfusion manifested by worsening renal function, altered
mentation and cold clammy extremities. ADHF associated with a poor prognosis if not treated
aggressively. Like chronic heart failure therapy, the goal is to improve symptoms but unlike
chronic therapy the other goals are to improve oxygenation and hemodynamic stability. The
mainstays of the acute medical treatment in acute decompensated congestive heart failure include
oxygen to improve hypoxia, diuresis to reduce both preload and intravascular volume and
vasodilators to reduce afterload. Some of the mainstays of chronic heart failure therapy are not
initiated acutely (ACE inhibtors,beta blockers and digoxin).
General Measures in the Management of Heart Failure
• Treat the underlying cause of heart failure such as ischemic heart disease, hypertension, and
valvular heart disease.
• Treat other non cardiac diseases that might contribute to the symptoms of heart failure such as
diabetes and hyperthyroidism[2].
• Treat with a low salt diet[3]
• Follow the patient's weight to check for fluid overload
• Treat with vaccines for influenza and pneumococcus [4][5]
Diuresis: First Step in the Management of Heart Failure
The treatment of chronic heart failure often begins with the administration of diuretics,
particularly if the patient has signs or symptoms of volume overload. While increased left
ventricular volume increases contractility to a point, if the heart is filled beyond that point, its
contractility diminishes (the patient "falls of the Staring curve"). Diuretics can reduce volume
overload and reduce shortness of breath and edema. There are three kinds of diuretics, loop
diuretics, thiazides and potassium-sparing diuretics. Diuretics rapidly improve the symptoms of
heart failure (within hours to days). Diuretics reduce excess volume that accumulates with heart
failure and decrease pulmonary edema that causes symptoms of dyspnea and orthopnea[6]. Lasix
20 to 40 mg PO daily is a conventional starting dose, but in some patients, torsemide may be a
better choice due to its more predictable absorption. Once a day dosing of a given diuretic is
preferred to twice a day dosing at a lower dose. A rise in BUN and Cr may reflect a reduction in
renal perfusion, and further diuresis should only be undertaken with careful monitoring of renal
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 9/14

function. The patient should weigh themselves each morning at the same time on the same scale,
and the diuretic dosing should be adjusted to maintain a constant weight. Given the risk of
hypokalemia or hyperkalemia, the blood level of electrolyes should be checked regularly.
ACE Inhibition and Angiotensin Receptor Blockade: Second Step in the Management of Heart
Failure
After diuretics are started or at the same time they are started, an ACE inhibitor can be initiated [7].
This includes a large group of drugs, such as Enalapril (Vasotec/Renitec), Ramipril
(Altace/Tritace/Ramace/Ramiwin), Quinapril (Accupril), Perindopril (Coversyl/Aceon), Lisinopril
(Lisodur/Lopril/Novatec/Prinivil/Zestril) and Benazepril (Lotensin). They can improve symptoms
and prognosis of heart failure in several ways including afterload reduction and favorable
ventricular remodeling. Usual side effects include dry cough and angioedema. Patients with
bilateral renal artery stenosis or severe renal impairment are not appropriate for angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI).
During or after the initiation of diuresis, one could start, for example, lisinopril 5 mg Q day. Every 1
- 2 weeks, the dose would be escalated to achieve a target dose of 15 to 20 mg Q day. An ACE
inhibitor is initiated before a beta blocker because an ACE inhibitor achieves its hemodynamic
effect more rapidly, and is less likely to cause a decline in hemodynamics. Although there is some
data to suggest that aspirin blunts the hemodynamic effect of ACE inhibitors, there is no data to
suggest that aspirin reduces the clinical efficacy of ACE inhibitors in heart failure patients. Aspirin
should be administered to patients with ischemic heart disease, but not to patients without it.
If a patient cannot tolerate a an ACE inhibitor (develops a cough), then an Angiotensin II receptor
blocker can be administered in its place. Angiotensin II receptor antagonists block the activation of
angiotensin II AT1 receptors. Blockade of AT1 receptors directly causes vasodilation, reduces
secretion of vasopressin, reduces production and secretion of aldosterone. Because angiotensin II
receptor antagonists do not inhibit the breakdown of bradykinin or other kinins, and are thus only
rarely associated with the persistent dry cough and/or angioedema that limit ACE inhibitor
therapy. Commonly administered agents in the management of heart failure include Candesartan,
Valsartan, Telmisartan, Losartan, Irbesartan, and Olmesartan. The effectiveness of switching to an
ARB from and ACE inhibitor was demonstrated for candesartan in the CHARM Alternative trial
[8].
In general, ARBs are as effective or slightly less effective than ACE inhibitors in the treatment of
congestive heart failure.[9][10] It is a class 2a recommendation to substitute an ARB as an
alternative to ACE inhibitors if the patient is already taking an ARB for another indication.[11]
The efficacy of adding an ARB to an ACE inhibitor was assessed in the CHARM Added trial[12].
While there was a reduction in the composite primary endpoint in the study, there was no
reduction in mortality. Furthermore, the VALIANT trial demonstrated that an ARB should not be
added to an ACE inhibitor in the post MI setting. These results for ARBs are in contrast to the
results of the EMPHASIS HF trial showed that the addition of eplerenone (an aldosterone
antagonist) to ACE inhibition improved clinical outcomes including mortality among patients with
class II or III heart failure with a reduced LVEF.[13] Thus, based upon the mortality benefit
observed in the EMPHASIS HF trial, an aldosterone antagonist rather than and ARB should be
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 10/14

added to an ACE inhibitor in patients with NYHA class II heart failure and an LVEF < 30%, in the
post-MI patient who has an LVEF < 40% who has heart failure symptoms or diabetes, and the
patient with class III or IV heart failure who has an LVEF < 35%.
"Triple therapy", the combined use of an ACE inhibitor, an ARB and an aldosterone antagonist is a
relative contraindication.
Beta blockers: Third Step in the Management of Heart Failure
Beta blockers reduce the heart rate which lowers the myocardial energy expenditure. They also
prolong diastolic filling and lengthen the period of coronary perfusion. Beta blockers can also
decrease the toxicity of catecholamines on the myocardium.
Once you have achieved a stable dose of a diuretic and an ACE inhibitor, then one of the three beta
blockers that have been associated with improved survival (carvedilol, metoprolol succinate or
bisoprolol) can be added and the dose titrated based upon the patient's tolerance. You should avoid
beta-blockers with intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (pindolol or acebutolol). It should be noted
that the 35% reduction in one year mortality observed in meta-analyses of beta-blockers in heart
failure was when these drugs were added to ACE inhibitors[14]. There are no direct comparisons of
the various beta-blockers, but some data does suggest that carvedilol may improve LVEF more
than the others, but it may not be as well tolerated due to its vasodilatory properties. If the patient
has been over diuresed, they may not tolerate the addition of a beta blocker.
Relative contraindications to beta-blocker administration include the following:
• Asthma or bronchospasm
• Hypotension resulting in poor end organ perfusion or symptoms
• Bradycardia or heart block (first degree heart block with a PR interval > 0.24, second
degree heart block, third degree heart block
• Peripheral arterial disease with limb ischemia at rest
• Moderate or greater peripheral edema
• Recent intravenous inotropic therapy
Given the potential for hemodynamic decompensation, the initiation of beta-blockers is best
undertaken by an individual or center specializing in heart failure management. The patient should
be aware of potential side effects, and should be aware that it may take one to three months for the
beta-blockers to improve heart failure symptoms. Therapy is initiated with very low doses, and the
dose of the beta-blocker should be doubled every two weeks until the target dose is achieved or
symptoms prevent further dose escalation.
• Carvedilol: Initial dose 3.125 mg twice daily, target dose 25 to 50 mg twice daily
• Metoprolol succinate: Initial dose 12.5 mg daily, target dose 200 mg daily
• Bisoprolol: Initial dose 1.25 mg daily, target dose 5 to 10 mg daily
Weight gain or peripheral edema that is not responsive to diuresis may require a reduction in the
dose of beta-blockers.
Aldosterone Antagonism: Fourth Step in the Management of Heart Failure
An aldosterone antagonist can be added to the regimen of 'select' patients. These selected patients
include:
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 11/14

• Class II heart failure and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 30%
• Class III/IV heart failure and a LVEF <35%
• Post ST segment elevation MI and a LVEF < 40% who have either symptomatic heart
failure or diabetes.
• The serum potassium must be under 5.0 meq/li and the glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
should be > 30 cc per minute
A requirement for aldosterone antagonist is that the patient's renal function and potassium can be
carefully monitored. Eplerenone has fewer endocrine side effects (1%) than spironolactone (10%),
but is more costly. A reasonable strategy is to initiate therapy with spironolactone at a dose of 25 to
50 mg daily, and then switch to eplerenone at a dose of 25 to 50 mg daily if endocrine side effects
develop.
Risk Factors for the Development of Hyperkalemia on an Aldosterone Antagonist
• Triple therapy with an ACE inhibitor and angiotensin II receptor blocker makes this
combination a contraindication
• Higher doses of either an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB)
• Hyperkalemia prior to initiation of spironolactone
• Comorbidities such as diabetes and chronic renal insufficiency
• Higher NYHA heart failure class
• Concomitant administration of beta blockers, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) or potassium supplements
• A daily dose of Spironolactone greater than 50 mg
The Combination of Hydralazine and a Nitrate: Fifth step in the Management of Heart Failure
The combination of hydralazine and a nitrate (particularly among black patients) can be added if
the patient continues to have symptoms on a diuretic, ACE inhibitor (or ARB in the intolerant
patient) and a beta blocker. The initial dose is isosorbide dinitrate 20 mg three times a day along
with hydralazine 25 mg three times a day. The dose(s) can be increased every 2 to 4 weeks to a
target dose of isosorbide dinitrate 40 mg three times a day and hydralazine 75 mg three times a
day.
Digoxin: Sixth step in the Management of Heart Failure
Digitalis can strengthen the contractility of the heart and can also be useful to achieve rate control
in patients with heart failure who also have atrial fibrillation. In the DIG trial, digoxin reduced the
rate of re-hospitalization but did not improve mortality among all patients enrolled in the trial.[15]
However, in a retrospective analysis, mortality was reduced in male patients who had digoxin
levels between 0.5 and 0.8 ng/mL and was increased in male patients with digoxin levels > 1.2
ng/ml.[16] A similar trend was observed among women patients: there was a trend towards lower
mortality at digoxin concentrations between 0.5 to 0.9 ng/ml, but significantly higher mortality at
digoxin concentrations > 1.2 ng/ml.[17]
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 12/14

Digoxin should not be used as primary therapy for congestive heart failure. The administration of
digoxin is reasonable in patients with NYHA class II-IV heart failure symptoms who have an LVEF
of < 40% despite treatment with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta
blockers, and an aldosterone antagonist. Small doses of 0.125 mg per day of digoxin are often
effective in maintaining a serum digoxin level between 0.5 and 0.8 ng/ml.
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (CRT) is recommended in congestive heart failure patients
with:
• Symptoms: NYHA Class II-IV
• QRS: A prolonged QRS interval > 0.12
• LVEF: A LVEF < 30% to 35%
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI):
Coronary artery disease (CAD) and impaired blood flow to the heart is one of the main causes of
heart failure. Relieving the blockages in the coronary arteries can improve overall heart function,
which may improve or resolve heart failure symptoms. The procedure is usually performed in a
cardiac catherization laboratory. A catheter, a very small tube with a tiny deflated balloon on the
end, is inserted through an incision in the groin area and then guided over a floppy wire to the
section of the diseased artery. The balloon is then inflated to prop open the artery. The balloon is
deflated and withdrawn once the artery has been fully opened. A stent may be placed during the
procedure to keep the blood vessel open. Clinical trials have demonstrated that percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) is a very effective and safe procedure to dilate blocked vessels and can
improve a patient's symptoms if ischemia or lack of blood flow is the problem.
Left Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD):
A left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is a mechanical pump-type device that can help maintain
the pumping ability of a failing heart. One type of LVAD has tubing that pulls blood from the left
ventricle into a pump. The pump then ejects blood into the aorta. LVADs are typically used for
weeks to months as a "bridge" to more definitive therapy such as a heart transplant rather than as
a final or "destination" therapy.
Intracardiac defibrillator
Fifty percent of patients with heart failure die of sudden cardiac death. ICDs are indicated for
patients with previous myocardial infarction and an LVEF <30%, sustained ventricular
tachycardia, inducible ventricular tachycardia. The morbidity and mortality benefit of ICD
placement compared with anti-arrhythmic drug therapy is controversial.
Ultrafiltration
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 13/14

In the setting of congestive heart failure, ultrafiltration has been associated with a reduced
incidence of hospitalization compared with diuretics in the UNLOAD trial, but no difference in
mortality.
Heart Transplantation
A Heart transplant may be the only effective treatment option for patients with severe, progressive
heart failure that can not be helped by medications, dietary and lifestyle changes. During a heart
transplant procedure, the surgeons connect the patient to a heart-lung machine, which takes over
the functions of the heart and lungs. Then the surgeons remove the diseased heart and replace it
with the donor heart. Finally, the major blood vessels are reconnected and the new heart is ready
to work. The outlook for people with heart transplants is good during the first few years after the
transplant. Over 85 percent of patients are alive more than a year after their heart transplant.
End-of-life considerations
End of life care in the patient with congestive heart failure is focused on making the patient
comfortable. Invasive procedures should be minimized, and patients may elect to have their
defibrillators inactivated. The growing number of patients with Stage IV heart failure (intractable
symptoms of fatigue, shortness of breath or chest pain at rest despite optimal medical therapy)
should be considered for palliative care or hospice, according to American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines listed below. Some have argued that any
patient with NYHA class III CHF should have a palliative care referral. Palliative care can not only
provide symptom management, but also assist with advanced care planning, goals of care in the
case of a significant decline, and making sure the patient has a medical power of attorney and
discussed his or her wishes with this individual.
Treatment of special populations
There is unfortunately insufficient data in subgroups of patients to mandate a change to guidelines
recommendations regarding the management of heart failure. Dosages should be altered as needed
in the elderly or in those with altered metabolism. African american patients may respond to the
addition of hydralazineand nitrates to the standard of care in the treatment of heart failure.
References
Template:WikiDoc Sources
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 14/14
