=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:07.656042",
  "file_size_bytes": 766568,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT)
By James D. Douketis, MD, McMaster University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023 | Modified Jan 2024
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is clotting of blood in a deep vein of an
extremity (usually calf or thigh) or the pelvis. DVT is the primary cause of
pulmonary embolism. DVT results from conditions that impair venous return,
lead to endothelial injury or dysfunction, or cause hypercoagulability. DVT may
be asymptomatic or cause pain and swelling in an extremity; pulmonary
embolism is an immediate complication. Diagnosis is by history and physical
examination and is confirmed by objective testing, typically with duplex
ultrasonography. D-Dimer testing is sometimes used when DVT is suspected; a
negative result helps to exclude DVT, whereas a positive result is nonspecific
and requires additional testing to confirm DVT. Treatment is with
anticoagulants. Prognosis is generally good with prompt, adequate treatment.
Common long-term complications include venous insufficiency with or without
the post-thrombotic syndrome.
DVT occurs most commonly in the lower extremities or pelvis (see figure Deep Veins of the Legs). DVT is
less common in deep veins of the upper extremities (< 5% of DVT cases) (1).
 1/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Deep Veins of the Legs
Lower extremity DVT is much more likely to cause pulmonary embolism (PE), possibly because of the
higher clot burden. Approximately 90% of proximal DVTs involve the femoral or popliteal veins and 10%
extend more proximally to involve the iliofemoral veins (2). DVT of the distal or calf veins usually involve
the posterior tibial or peroneal veins. Distal or calf vein DVT is less likely to be a source of large emboli
but can propagate to the proximal thigh veins and from there cause PE. About 50% of patients with DVT
have occult PE, and at least 30% of patients with PE have demonstrable DVT (3).
Pearls & Pitfalls
About 50% of patients with DVT have occult pulmonary emboli.
General references
 2/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Yamashita Y, Morimoto T, Amano H, et al. Deep vein thrombosis in upper extremities: Clinical
characteristics, management strategies and long-term outcomes from the COMMAND VTE
Registry. Thromb Res 2019;177:1-9. doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2019.02.029
2. Douketis JD, Kearon C, Bates S, Duku EK, Ginsberg JS. Risk of fatal pulmonary embolism in
patients with treated venous thromboembolism. JAMA 1998;279(6):458-462.
doi:10.1001/jama.279.6.458
3. Stevens SM, Woller SC, Kreuziger LB, et al. Antithrombotic Therapy for VTE Disease: Second
Update of the CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report [published correction appears in Chest.
2022 Jul;162(1):269]. Chest 2021;160(6):e545-e608. doi:10.1016/j.chest.2021.07.055
Etiology of Deep Venous Thrombosis
Many factors can contribute to DVT (see table Risk Factors for Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary
Embolism). Cancer is a risk factor for DVT, particularly in older patients and in patients with recurrent
thrombosis. The association is strongest for lung, ovarian, gastric, brain or pancreatic cancers where 10
to 15% of patients can develop VTE (1). Occult cancers may be present in patients with apparently
idiopathic DVT, but extensive workup of patients for tumors is not recommended unless patients have
major risk factors for cancer or symptoms suggestive of an occult cancer.
Etiology reference
1. Farge D, Frere C, Connors JM, et al. 2022 international clinical practice guidelines for the
treatment and prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer, including patients
with COVID-19. Lancet Oncol 2022;23(7):e334-e347. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00160-7
Pathophysiology of Deep Venous Thrombosis
Lower extremity DVT most often results from
Impaired venous return (eg, in immobilized patients)
Endothelial injury or dysfunction (eg, after leg fractures)
Hypercoagulability
Upper extremity DVT most often results from
Endothelial injury due to central venous catheters, pacemakers, or injection drug use
Upper extremity DVT occasionally occurs as part of superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome (compression or
invasion of the superior vena cava by a tumor and causing symptoms such as facial swelling, dilated
neck veins, and facial flushing) or results from a hypercoagulable state or subclavian vein compression
at the thoracic outlet (1). The compression may be due to a normal or an accessory first rib or fibrous
band (thoracic outlet syndrome) or occur during strenuous arm activity (effort thrombosis, or Paget-
Schroetter syndrome, which is rare).
 3/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Deep venous thrombosis usually begins in venous valve cusps. Thrombi consist of thrombin, fibrin, and
red blood cells with relatively few platelets (red thrombi); without treatment, thrombi may propagate
proximally or travel to the lungs.
Complications
Common complications of DVT include
Chronic venous insufficiency
Post-thrombotic syndrome
Pulmonary embolism
Much less commonly, acute massive DVT lead to phlegmasia alba dolens or phlegmasia cerulea dolens,
both of which, unless promptly diagnosed and treated, can result in venous gangrene.
In phlegmasia alba dolens, a rare complication of DVT during pregnancy, the leg turns milky white.
Pathophysiology is unclear, but edema may increase soft-tissue pressure beyond capillary perfusion
pressures, resulting in tissue ischemia and venous gangrene. Phlegmasia alba dolens may progress to
phlegmasia cerulea dolens.
In phlegmasia cerulea dolens, massive iliofemoral venous thrombosis causes near-total venous
occlusion; the leg becomes ischemic, extremely painful, and cyanotic. Pathophysiology may involve
complete stasis of venous and arterial blood flow in the lower extremity because venous return is
occluded or massive edema cuts off arterial blood flow. Venous gangrene may result.
Infection rarely develops in venous clots. Jugular vein suppurative thrombophlebitis (Lemierre
syndrome), a bacterial (usually anaerobic) infection of the internal jugular vein and surrounding soft
tissues, may follow tonsillopharyngitis and is often complicated by bacteremia and sepsis. In septic
pelvic thrombophlebitis, pelvic thromboses develop postpartum and become infected, causing
intermittent fever. Suppurative (septic) thrombophlebitis, a bacterial infection of a superficial peripheral
vein, comprises infection and clotting and usually is caused by venous catheterization.
Pathophysiology reference
1. Bosch FTM, Nisio MD, Büller HR, van Es N. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Management of Upper
Extremity Deep Vein Thrombosis. J Clin Med 2020;9(7):2069. doi:10.3390/jcm9072069
Symptoms and Signs of Deep Venous Thrombosis
DVT may occur in ambulatory patients or as a complication of surgery or major medical illness. Among
patients who are hospitalized and at high risk, most deep vein thrombi occur in the small calf veins, are
asymptomatic, and may not be detected.
When present, symptoms and signs of DVT (eg, vague aching pain, tenderness along the distribution of
the veins, edema, erythema) are nonspecific, vary in frequency and severity, and are similar in arms and
legs. Dilated collateral superficial veins may become visible or palpable. Calf discomfort elicited by ankle
 4/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
dorsiflexion with the knee extended (Homans sign) occasionally occurs with distal leg DVT but is neither
sensitive nor specific. Tenderness, swelling of the whole leg, > 3 cm difference in circumference between
calves, pitting edema, and collateral superficial veins may be most specific; DVT is likely with a
combination of ≥ 3 in the absence of another likely diagnosis (see table Probability of Deep Venous
Thrombosis Based on Clinical Factors).
Low-grade fever may be present; DVT may be the cause of fever without an obvious source, especially in
postoperative patients. Symptoms of pulmonary embolism, if it occurs, may include shortness of breath
and pleuritic chest pain.
TABLE
Probability of Deep Venous Thrombosis Based on Clinical Factors
Factors
Tenderness along distribution of the veins in calf or thigh
Swelling of entire leg
Calf swelling (> 3 cm difference in circumference between calves, measured 10 cm
below the tibial tuberosity)
Pitting edema greater in affected leg
Dilated collateral superficial veins
Active cancer (treatment ongoing or given within the previous 6 months)
Immobilization of lower extremity (eg, due to paralysis, paresis, casting, or recent
long-distance travel)
Surgery leading to immobility for > 3 days within the past 4 weeks
Probability
Probability equals the number of factors, subtracting 2 if another diagnosis is as
likely as or more likely than deep venous thrombosis.
High probability: ≥ 3 points
Moderate probability: 1–2 points
Low probability: ≤ 0 points
Based on data from Anand SS, Wells PS, Hunt D, et al: Does this patient have deep vein
thrombosis? Journal of the American Medical Association 279 (14):1094–1099, 1998.
Common causes of asymmetric leg swelling that mimic DVT are
Soft-tissue trauma
Cellulitis
 5/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Compression of a pelvic vein
Obstruction of a lymphatic vessel in the pelvis
Popliteal cyst (Baker cyst) that obstructs venous return
Less common causes include abdominal or pelvic tumors that obstruct venous or lymphatic return.
Symmetric bilateral leg swelling is the typical result of use of medications that cause dependent edema
(eg, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, estrogen, high-dose opioids), venous hypertension
(usually due to right heart failure), and hypoalbuminemia; however, such swelling may be asymmetric if
venous insufficiency coexists and is worse in one leg.
Common causes of calf pain that mimic acute DVT include
Venous insufficiency and post-thrombotic syndrome
Cellulitis that causes painful erythema of the calf
Ruptured popliteal (Baker) cyst (pseudo-DVT), which causes calf swelling, pain, and
sometimes bruising in the region of the medial malleolus
Partial or complete tears of the calf muscles or tendons
Diagnosis of Deep Venous Thrombosis
Ultrasonography
Sometimes D-dimer testing
History and physical examination help determine probability of DVT before testing (see table Probability
of Deep Venous Thrombosis Based on Clinical Factors). Diagnosis is typically by ultrasonography with
Doppler flow studies (duplex ultrasonography). The need for additional tests (eg, D-dimer testing) and
their choice and sequence depend on pretest probability and sometimes ultrasonography results. No
single testing protocol is best; one approach is described in the figure One Approach to Testing for
Suspected Deep Venous Thrombosis.
 6/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
One Approach to Testing for Suspected Deep Venous Thrombosis
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
DVT Probability: Wells Score System
Ultrasonography
 7/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Doppler Ultrasound of a Patient with a Thrombus in Femoral Vein
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Ultrasonography identifies thrombi by directly visualizing the venous lining and by demonstrating
abnormal vein compressibility or, with Doppler flow studies, impaired venous flow. The test is > 90%
sensitive and > 95% specific for femoral and popliteal vein thrombosis but is less accurate for iliac or calf
vein thrombosis (1).
D-Dimer
D-Dimer is a byproduct of fibrinolysis; elevated levels suggest recent presence and lysis of thrombi. D-
Dimer assays vary in sensitivity and specificity; however, most are sensitive and not specific. A positive
test result is nonspecific because levels can be elevated by other conditions (eg, liver disease, trauma,
pregnancy, positive rheumatoid factor, inflammation, recent surgery, cancer), and further testing is
necessary. Only the most accurate tests should be used. For example, a highly sensitive test is enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which has a sensitivity of about 95% (2). D-dimer levels also
increase with age, which further decreases the specificity in older patients (3).
The Pulmonary Embolism Graduated D-dimer (PEGeD) strategy is a diagnostic approach for pulmonary
embolism that adjusts for D-dimer levels according to the patient's clinical pretest probability(4):
If pretest probability of DVT is low, DVT can generally be excluded in patients with a D-
dimer level < 1000 ng/mL(< 5476 nmol/L) on a sensitive test.
If pretest probability of DVT is moderate, DVT can be excluded in patients with a normal
D-dimer level (ie, < 500 ng/mL) on a sensitive test. Patients with a positive test require
additional testing to rule out DVT.
If pretest probability of DVT is high, D-dimer testing can be done at the same time as
duplex ultrasonography. A positive ultrasound result confirms the diagnosis regardless of
the D-dimer level. If ultrasonography does not reveal evidence of DVT, a normal D-dimer
level helps exclude DVT. Patients with an elevated D-dimer level should have repeat
 8/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
ultrasonography in a few days or additional imaging, such as venography, depending on
clinical suspicion.
Additional testing
If symptoms and signs suggest PE, additional imaging (eg, CT pulmonary angiography or, less often,
ventilation/perfusion [V/Q] scanning) is required.
Alternative imaging
Contrast-enhanced computed tomographic venography and magnetic resonance venography are other
imaging modalities rarely used in the diagnosis of DVT. They are generally reserved for cases in which
ultrasonography results are negative or indeterminate and the clinical suspicion for DVT remains high.
These imaging tests are less well validated for DVT, are more costly, and may be associated with other
complications (eg, related to exposure to radiation and contrast agents).
Contrast venography was the definitive test for the diagnosis of DVT in the past but has been largely
replaced by ultrasonography, which is noninvasive, more readily available, and almost equally accurate
for detecting DVT.
Determination of cause
Patients with confirmed DVT and an obvious cause (eg, immobilization, surgical procedure, leg trauma)
need no further testing. Testing to detect hypercoagulability is controversial but is sometimes done in
selected patients who have idiopathic (or unprovoked) DVT or recurrent DVT, in patients who have a
personal or family history of other thromboses, and in young patients with no obvious predisposing
factors. Some evidence suggests that testing for the presence of hypercoagulability in patients with or
without clinical risk factors does not predict DVT recurrence (5, 6, 7) .
Screening patients with DVT for cancer has a low yield. Selective testing guided by complete history and
physical examination and basic "routine" tests (complete blood count, chest x-ray, urinalysis, liver
enzymes, and serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen [BUN], creatinine) aimed at detecting cancer is
probably adequate. In addition, patients should have any appropriate cancer screening (eg,
mammography, colonoscopy) that is due.
Diagnosis references
1. Lensing AW, Prandoni P, Brandjes D, et al. Detection of deep-vein thrombosis by real-time B-
mode ultrasonography. N Engl J Med 1989;320(6):342-345. doi:10.1056/NEJM198902093200602
2. Di Nisio M, Squizzato A, Rutjes AW, Büller HR, Zwinderman AH, Bossuyt PM. Diagnostic accuracy
of D-dimer test for exclusion of venous thromboembolism: a systematic review [published
correction appears in J Thromb Haemost 2013 Oct;11(10):1942]. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5(2):296-
304. doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02328.x
3. Righini M, Van Es J, Den Exter PL, et al. Age-adjusted D-dimer cutoff levels to rule out pulmonary
embolism: the ADJUST-PE study [published correction appears in JAMA. 2014 Apr 23-
30;311(16):1694]. JAMA 2014;311(11):1117-1124. doi:10.1001/jama.2014.2135
 9/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
4. Kearon C, de Wit K, Parpia S, et al. Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism with d-Dimer Adjusted to
Clinical Probability. N Engl J Med 2019;381(22):2125-2134. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1909159
5. Coppens M, Reijnders JH, Middeldorp S, Doggen CJ, Rosendaal FR. Testing for inherited
thrombophilia does not reduce the recurrence of venous thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost
2008;6(9):1474-1477. doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2008.03055.x
6. Lijfering WM, Middeldorp S, Veeger NJ, et al. Risk of recurrent venous thrombosis in
homozygous carriers and double heterozygous carriers of factor V Leiden and prothrombin
G20210A. Circulation 2010;121(15):1706-1712. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.906347
7. Segal JB, Brotman DJ, Necochea AJ, et al. Predictive value of factor V Leiden and prothrombin
G20210A in adults with venous thromboembolism and in family members of those with a
mutation: a systematic review. JAMA 2009;301(23):2472-2485. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.853
Treatment of Deep Venous Thrombosis
Anticoagulation
Sometimes inferior vena cava filter, thrombolytic therapy, or surgery
Treatment is aimed primarily at pulmonary embolism prevention and secondarily at symptom relief and
prevention of DVT recurrence, chronic venous insufficiency, and post-thrombotic syndrome. Treatment
of lower and upper extremity DVT is generally the same.
General supportive measures include pain control with analgesics, which may include short (3- to 5-day)
courses of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Extended treatment with NSAIDs and aspirin
should be avoided because their antiplatelet effects may increase the risk of bleeding complications. In
addition, elevation of legs (supported by a pillow or other soft surface to avoid venous compression) is
recommended during periods of inactivity. Patients may be as physically active as they can tolerate;
there is no evidence that early activity increases risk of clot dislodgement and PE and may help to
reduce the risk of the post-thrombotic syndrome.
Anticoagulants
(For details on medications and their complications, see Medications for Deep Venous Thrombosis)
Almost all patients with DVT are treated with anticoagulants (1, 2). Various anticoagulants are suitable
for initial therapy, and the choice of agent is influenced by patient comorbidities (eg, renal dysfunction,
cancer), preferences, cost, and convenience.
Some patients are initially given an injectable heparin (typically low molecular weight) for 5 to 7 days,
followed by longer term treatment with an oral agent. Warfarin, if used, is started within 24 hours after
the start of the injectable heparin. Although heparin acts rapidly and provides immediate
anticoagulation, warfarin takes about 5 days to achieve a therapeutic effect; hence, heparin is required
for 5 to 7 days. For patients who are to start edoxaban (an oral factor Xa inhibitor) or dabigatran (an oral
direct thrombin inhibitor), the oral agent is started after 5 days of injectable heparin.
 10/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Alternatively, anticoagulation may be initiated immediately with selected direct oral anticoagulants
(rivaroxaban or apixaban) without first giving an injectable heparin. Starting rivaroxaban or apixaban
without heparin is justified based on results of clinical trials. Fondaparinux, a parenteral factor Xa
inhibitor, is sometimes substituted for low molecular weight heparin and can also be used to treat acute
DVT.
For selected patients (eg, with extensive iliofemoral DVT or cancer), continued treatment with a low-
molecular-weight heparin rather than switching to an oral agent may be preferred.
Inadequate anticoagulation in the first 24 to 48 hours may increase risk of recurrence or of PE. Acute
DVT can be treated on an outpatient basis unless severe symptoms require parenteral analgesics, other
disorders preclude safe outpatient discharge, or other factors (eg, functional, socioeconomic) might
prevent the patient from adhering to prescribed treatments.
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filter
An IVC filter may help prevent PE in patients with lower extremity DVT who have contraindications to
anticoagulant therapy or in patients with recurrent DVT (or emboli) despite adequate anticoagulation.
An IVC filter is placed in the inferior vena cava just below the renal veins via catheterization of an
internal jugular or femoral vein. Some IVC filters are removable and can be used temporarily (eg, until
contraindications to anticoagulation subside or resolve).
IVC filters reduce the risk of acute embolic complications but can have longer-term complications (eg,
venous collaterals can develop, providing a pathway for emboli to circumvent the filter) There is also an
increased risk of recurrent DVT). Also, IVC filters can dislodge or become obstructed by a clot. Thus,
patients with recurrent DVT or nonmodifiable risk factors for DVT may still require anticoagulation
despite the presence of an IVC filter.
A clotted filter may cause bilateral lower extremity venous congestion (including acute phlegmasia
cerulea dolens), lower body ischemia, and acute kidney injury. Treatment for a dislodged filter is
removal, using angiographic or, if necessary, surgical methods. Despite widespread use of IVC filters,
efficacy in preventing PE is understudied and unproven (3). IVC filters should be removed whenever
possible.
Thrombolytic (fibrinolytic) therapy
Thrombolytic medications, which include alteplase, tenecteplase, and streptokinase, lyse clots and may
be more effective than anticoagulation alone in selected patients, but the risk of bleeding is higher than
with heparin. Consequently, thrombolytics should be considered only in highly selected patients with
DVT. Patients who may benefit from thrombolytics include those < 60 years with extensive iliofemoral
DVT who have evolving or existing limb ischemia (eg, phlegmasia cerulea dolens) and do not have risk
factors for bleeding (4).
Catheter-directed thrombolysis has largely replaced systemic administration when used for DVT.
Surgery
 11/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Surgery is rarely needed. However, thrombectomy, fasciotomy, or both are mandatory for phlegmasia
alba dolens or phlegmasia cerulea dolens unresponsive to thrombolytics to try to prevent limb-
threatening gangrene.
Treatment references
1. Ortel TL, Neumann I, Ageno W, et al: American Society of Hematology 2020 guidelines for
management of venous thromboembolism: treatment of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary
embolism. Blood Adv 4(19):4693-4738, 2020. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2020001830
2. Stevens SM, Woller SC, Kreuziger LB, et al: Antithrombotic Therapy for VTE Disease: Second
Update of the CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel Report [published correction appears in Chest
2022 Jul;162(1):269]. Chest 160(6):e545-e608, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.chest.2021.07.055
3. Turner TE, Saeed MJ, Novak E, Brown DL: Association of Inferior Vena Cava Filter Placement for
Venous Thromboembolic Disease and a Contraindication to Anticoagulation With 30-Day
Mortality. JAMA Netw Open 1(3):e180452, 2018. Published 2018 Jul 6.
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.0452
4. Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: Antithrombotic
Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-
Based Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Chest 2012 Dec;142(6):1698-
1704]. Chest 2012;141(2 Suppl):e419S-e496S. doi:10.1378/chest.11-2301
Prognosis for Deep Venous Thrombosis
Without adequate treatment, lower extremity DVT has a 3% risk of fatal PE (1, 2); death due to upper
extremity DVT is very rare. Risk of recurrent DVT is lowest for patients with transient risk factors (eg,
surgery, trauma, temporary immobility) and greatest for patients with persistent risk factors (eg,
cancer), idiopathic DVT, or incomplete resolution of past DVT (residual thrombus). A normal D-dimer
level obtained after anticoagulation is stopped for 3 to 4 weeks may help predict a relatively low risk of
DVT or PE recurrence, more so in women than in men. Risk of venous insufficiency is difficult to predict.
Risk factors for post-thrombotic syndrome include proximal thrombosis, recurrent ipsilateral DVT, and
2
body mass index (BMI) ≥ 22 kg/m .
Prognosis references
1. Yamashita Y, Murata K, Morimoto T, et al. Clinical outcomes of patients with pulmonary
embolism versus deep vein thrombosis: From the COMMAND VTE Registry. Thromb Res
2019;184:50-57. doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2019.10.029
2. Douketis JD, Kearon C, Bates S, Duku EK, Ginsberg JS. Risk of fatal pulmonary embolism in
patients with treated venous thromboembolism. JAMA 1998;279(6):458-462.
doi:10.1001/jama.279.6.458
Prevention of Deep Venous Thrombosis
 12/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
It is preferable and safer to prevent DVT than to treat it, particularly in patients who are at high risk. The
following modalities are used (for a more complete discussion, see DVT Prevention).
Prevention of immobility
Prophylactic anticoagulation (eg, low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, adjusted-
dose warfarin, direct oral anticoagulant)
Intermittent pneumatic compression
Patients who should not receive anticoagulants may benefit from intermittent pneumatic compression
devices, elastic stockings, or both.
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filters do not prevent DVT but are sometimes placed in an attempt to prevent
PE. An IVC filter may help prevent PE in patients with lower extremity DVT who have contraindications to
anticoagulant therapy or in patients with recurrent DVT (or emboli) despite adequate
anticoagulation. IVC filters are also sometimes used for the primary prevention of PE after certain types
of surgery or in patients with multiple severe injuries; however, their use is not routinely recommended
for these indications given the lack of evidence of efficacy (1).
Prevention reference
1. Ho KM, Rao S, Honeybul S, et al. A Multicenter Trial of Vena Cava Filters in Severely Injured
Patients. N Engl J Med 2019;381(4):328-337. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1806515
Key Points
Symptoms and signs are nonspecific, so clinicians must be alert, particularly in high-risk
patients.
Low-risk patients may have D-dimer testing, as a normal result essentially excludes deep
venous thrombosis (DVT); others should have ultrasonography.
Treatment initially is with an injectable heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight
heparin [LMWH]) followed by an oral anticoagulant (warfarin, dabigatran, or a factor Xa
inhibitor) or a LMWH; alternatively, the oral factor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban and
apixaban may be used for initial and ongoing treatment.
Duration of treatment is typically 3 or 6 months, depending on the presence and nature
of risk factors; certain patients require lifelong treatment.
Preventive treatment is required for bedbound patients with major illness and/or those
undergoing certain surgical procedures.
Early mobilization, leg elevation, and an anticoagulant are the recommended preventive
measures; patients who should not receive anticoagulants may benefit from
intermittent pneumatic compression devices, elastic stockings, or both.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
 13/14

 Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 14/14
