=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:03.812591",
  "file_size_bytes": 682163,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Edema
By Andrea D. Thompson, MD, PhD, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2024
Edema is swelling of soft tissues due to increased interstitial fluid. The fluid is predominantly water, but
protein and cell-rich fluid can accumulate if there is infection or lymphatic obstruction.
Edema may be generalized or local (eg, limited to a single extremity or part of an extremity). It
sometimes appears abruptly; patients say that an extremity suddenly swells. More often, edema
develops insidiously, beginning with weight gain, puffy eyes at awakening in the morning, and tight
shoes at the end of the day. Slowly developing edema may become massive before patients seek
medical care.
Lower Extremity Edema
IMAGE
PETER SKINNER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Edema itself causes few symptoms other than occasionally a feeling of tightness or fullness; other
symptoms are usually related to the underlying disorder. Patients with edema due to heart failure (a
common cause) often have dyspnea during exertion, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Patients with edema due to deep venous thrombosis (DVT) often have leg pain.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 1/11
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Scrotal Edema
IMAGE
DR P. MARAZZI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Edema due to extracellular fluid volume expansion is often dependent. Thus, in ambulatory patients,
edema is in the feet and lower legs; patients requiring bed rest develop edema in the buttocks, genitals,
and posterior thighs. Females who lie on only one side may develop edema in the dependent breast.
Lymphatic obstruction causes edema distal to the site of obstruction.
Pathophysiology of Edema
Edema results from increased movement of fluid from the intravascular to the interstitial space or
decreased movement of water from the interstitium into the capillaries or lymphatic vessels. The
mechanism involves one or more of the following:
Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure
Decreased plasma oncotic pressure
Increased capillary permeability
Obstruction of the lymphatic system
As fluid shifts into the interstitial space, intravascular volume is depleted. Intravascular volume
depletion activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-vasopressin (ADH) system, resulting in renal
sodium retention. By increasing osmolality, renal sodium retention triggers water retention by the
kidneys and helps maintain plasma volume. Increased renal sodium retention also may be a primary
cause of fluid overload and hence edema. Excessive exogenous sodium intake may also contribute.
Less often, edema results from decreased movement of fluid out of the interstitial space into the
capillaries due to lack of adequate plasma oncotic pressure, as in nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing
enteropathy, liver failure, or starvation.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 2/11
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Increased capilliary permeability occurs in infections or as the result of toxin or inflammatory damage to
the capillary walls. In angioedema, mediators, including mast cell–derived mediators (eg, histamine,
leukotrienes, prostaglandins) and bradykinin and complement-derived mediators, cause focal edema.
The lymphatic system is responsible for removing protein and white blood cells (along with some water)
from the interstitium. Lymphatic obstruction allows these substances to accumulate in the interstitium.
Etiology of Edema
Generalized edema is most commonly caused by
Heart failure
Liver failure
Kidney disorders (especially nephrotic syndrome)
Localized edema is most commonly caused by
DVT or another venous disorder or venous obstruction (eg, by tumor)
Infection
Angioedema
Lymphatic obstruction
Chronic venous insufficiency may involve one or both legs.
Common causes are listed by primary mechanism (see table Some Causes of Edema).
TABLE
Some Causes of Edema
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Increased hydrostatic pressure, fluid overload
Right heart failure Symmetric, dependent, Chest radiography and
(primary or secondary to painless, pitting edema; ECG
left-sided disease or to often with left-sided heart
Usually echocardiography
constrictive pericarditis or failure, with dyspnea
pericardial effusion) during exertion,
directly increasing venous orthopnea, and
pressure paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea
Commonly, lung crackles,
S3 or S4 gallop or both
(due to left heart failure);
jugular venous distention,
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 3/11
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
hepatojugular reflux, and
Kussmaul sign
With constrictive
pericarditis or pericardial
effusion, in addition to
jugular venous distention,
hepatojugular reflux, and
Kussmaul sign; may note
distant or weak heart
sounds.
Symmetric, dependent,
painless, usually mild
Pregnancy and
Clinical evaluation
pitting edema
premenstrual state
Apparent by history
Medications (eg, minoxidil,
NSAIDs, estrogens,
Symmetric, dependent,
fludrocortisone,
painless, usually mild Clinical evaluation
dihydropyridine, diltiazem,
pitting edema
other calcium channel
blockers)
Symmetric, dependent,
painless, usually mild
Iatrogenic (eg, excessive
pitting edema
Clinical evaluation
intravenous fluids)
Apparent by history and
medical record
Increased hydrostatic pressure, venous obstruction
DVT Acute, pitting edema in a Ultrasound
single, usually lower
D-dimer testing
extremity, usually with
pain; sometimes Homans
sign (pain in the calf when
the foot is dorsiflexed)
Redness, warmth, and
tenderness; possibly less
marked than in soft-tissue
infection
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 4/11
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Sometimes a predisposing
factor (eg, recent surgery,
trauma, immobilization,
hormone replacement,
cancer)
Chronic edema in one or
both lower extremities,
with brownish
Chronic venous discoloration, discomfort
Clinical evaluation
but not marked pain, and
insufficiency
sometimes skin ulcers
Often associated with
varicose veins
Nonpainful, slowly
developing edema
Extrinsic venous
If tumor compresses the Clinical evaluation
compression (eg, by
superior vena cava, usually
tumor, a gravid uterus, or
Ultrasound or CT if tumor
facial plethora, distended
marked abdominal
is suspected
neck veins, and absent
obesity)
venous pulse waves above
the obstruction
Prolonged immobility (eg,
being bedbound or on a
Prolonged absence of
long airline flight)
skeletal muscle pumping Clinical evaluation
activity on extremity veins
Painless, symmetric,
dependent edema
Decreased plasma oncotic pressure†
Diffuse edema, often
24-hour urine collection to
significant ascites, and
Nephrotic syndrome check for protein loss
sometimes periorbital
Serum albumin level
edema
Testing for cause
Sometimes endoscopy
Protein-losing enteropathy Significant diarrhea
Sometimes serum and 24-
hour stool testing for
alpha-1-antitrypsin
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 5/11
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Often with significant
ascites
Causes often apparent by
Reduced albumin history
synthesis (eg, in liver Serum albumin, liver tests,
If cause is a chronic liver
disorders or PT/PTT
disorder, often jaundice,
undernutrition)
spider angiomas,
gynecomastia, palmar
erythema, and testicular
atrophy
Increased capillary permeability
Sudden, focal, asymmetric,
nondependent
subcutaneous or
Angioedema (allergic,
submucosal edema, more Clinical evaluation
idiopathic, hereditary)
often involving the face,
lips, oral mucosa,
extremities, or genitals
Injury (eg, burns, Focal edema, sometimes
chemicals, toxins, blunt erythematous; causes Clinical evaluation
trauma) apparent by history
Obvious sepsis syndrome
with fever, tachycardia,
Severe sepsis (causing
Cultures
focal infection
vascular endothelial
Imaging studies as needed
leakage) Painless, symmetrical
edema
If due to cellulitis, usually
redder (or darker on dark
skin) and more painful and
Clinical evaluation
tender than that due to
Soft-tissue infection (eg,
angioedema and more
Cultures
cellulitis, necrotizing
circumscribed than that
myofasciitis) Sometimes ultrasound to
due to DVT
rule out DVT
With necrotizing
infections, severe pain,
constitutional symptoms
Lymphatic obstruction
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 6/11
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Etiology usually apparent
Iatrogenic (eg, after lymph
by history
node dissection in cancer
Clinical evaluation
surgery or after radiation
Initially pitting edema, with
therapy)
fibrosis developing later
Often onset in childhood,
but for some types, only
Sometimes
Congenital (rare)
later onset
lymphoscintigraphy
May be familial
History of being in an
endemic area
Microscopic examination
Lymphatic filariasis
Usually focal edema,
of blood smear
sometimes involving the
genitals
* Most patients with generalized edema require complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes,
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, liver tests, serum protein measurement, and
urinalysis (to check for proteinuria).
† Decreased plasma oncotic pressure often triggers secondary sodium and water retention,
leading to fluid overload.
DVT = deep venous thrombosis; NSAIDs = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PT =
prothrombin time; PTT = partial thromboplastin time; S3 = third heart sound; S4 = fourth
heart sound.
Evaluation of Edema
History
History of present illness should include location and duration of edema and presence and degree of
pain or discomfort. Female patients should be asked whether they are pregnant and whether edema
seems related to menstrual periods. Having patients with chronic edema keep a log of weight gain or
loss is valuable.
Review of systems should include symptoms of causative disorders, including dyspnea during
exertion, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (heart failure); alcohol or hepatotoxin
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 7/11
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
exposure, jaundice, and easy bruising (a liver disorder); malaise and anorexia (cancer or a liver or kidney
disorder); and immobilization, extremity injury, or recent surgery (DVT).
Past medical history should include any disorders known to cause edema, including heart, liver, and
kidney disorders and cancer (including any related surgery or radiation therapy). The history should also
include predisposing conditions for these causes, including streptococcal infection, recent viral infection
(eg, hepatitis), alcohol use disorder, and hypercoagulable disorders. Medication history should include
specific questions about medications known to cause edema (see table Some Causes of Edema).
Patients are asked about the amount of sodium used in cooking and at the table.
Physical examination
The area of edema is identified and examined for extent, warmth, erythema, and tenderness; symmetry
or lack of it is noted. Presence and degree of pitting (visible and palpable depressions caused by
pressure from the examiner’s fingers on the edematous area, which displaces the interstitial fluid) are
noted.
In the general examination, the skin is inspected for jaundice, bruising, and spider angiomas (suggesting
a liver disorder).
Lungs are examined for dullness to percussion, reduced or exaggerated breath sounds, crackles,
rhonchi, and a pleural friction rub.
The internal jugular vein height, waveform, and reflux are noted.
The heart is palpated for thrills, thrust, parasternal lift, and asynchronous abnormal systolic bulge.
Auscultation for loud pulmonic component of second heart sound (P2), third (S3) or fourth (S4) heart
sounds, murmurs, and pericardial rub or knock is done; all suggest cardiac origin.
The abdomen is inspected, palpated, and percussed for ascites, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly to
check for a liver disorder or heart failure. The kidneys are palpated, and the bladder is percussed. An
abnormal abdominal mass, if present, should be palpated.
Red flags
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology of edema:
Sudden onset
Significant pain
Shortness of breath
Fever
History of a heart disorder or an abnormal cardiac examination
Hemoptysis, dyspnea, or pleural friction rub
Hepatomegaly, jaundice, ascites, splenomegaly, or hematemesis
Unilateral leg swelling with tenderness
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 8/11
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Interpretation of findings
Potential acute life threats, which typically manifest with sudden onset of focal edema, must be
identified. Such a presentation suggests acute DVT, soft-tissue infection, or angioedema. Acute DVT may
lead to pulmonary embolism (PE), which can be fatal. Soft-tissue infections range from minor to life
threatening, depending on factors that include the infecting organism and the patient’s health. Acute
angioedema sometimes progresses to involve the airway, with serious consequences.
Dyspnea may occur with edema due to heart failure, DVT if PE has occurred, acute respiratory distress
syndrome, or angioedema that involves the airways.
Generalized, slowly developing edema suggests a chronic heart, kidney, or liver disorder. Although
these disorders can also be life threatening, complications tend to take much longer to develop.
These factors and other clinical features help suggest the cause (see table Some Causes of Edema).
Testing
For most patients with generalized edema, testing should include complete blood count (CBC), serum
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, liver tests, serum protein, and urinalysis (particularly
noting the presence of protein and microscopic hematuria). Other tests should be done based on the
suspected cause (see table Some Causes of Edema)—eg, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) for suspected
heart failure or D-dimer for suspected pulmonary embolism.
Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) can sometimes be useful to evaluate the following:
Fluid and volume status (evaluating jugular venous pressure, inferior vena cava, B-lines,
pleural effusions)
Left ventricular ejection fraction
Right ventricular abnormalities (eg, increased right ventricular pressure or size or impaired
function) secondary to disorders such as pulmonary embolism or right ventricular failure
Patients with isolated lower-extremity swelling should usually have venous obstruction excluded by
ultrasound.
Treatment of Edema
Specific causes are treated.
Patients with sodium retention often benefit from restriction of dietary sodium. Patients with heart
failure should eliminate salt in cooking and at the table and avoid prepared foods with added salt.
Patients with advanced cirrhosis or nephrotic syndrome often require more severe sodium restriction (≤
1 g/day). Potassium salts are often substituted for sodium salts to make sodium restriction tolerable;
however, care should be taken, especially in patients receiving potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) and in those with a kidney
disorder because potentially fatal hyperkalemia can result.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 9/11
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
People with conditions involving sodium retention may also benefit from loop or thiazide diuretics.
However, diuretics should not be given only to improve the appearance caused by edema. When
diuretics are used, potassium wasting can be dangerous in some patients; potassium-sparing diuretics
(eg, amiloride, triamterene, spironolactone, eplerenone) inhibit sodium reabsorption in the distal
nephron and collecting duct. When used alone, they modestly increase sodium excretion. Both
triamterene and amiloride have been combined with a thiazide to prevent potassium wasting. An ACE
inhibitor–thiazide combination also reduces potassium wasting.
Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (eg, canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin) lower
serum glucose in patients with diabetes but also induce diuresis by increasing natriuresis and glycosuria
without significantly affecting serum electrolytes (1, 2, 3, 4). They can be used in patients with heart
failure or nephrotic syndrome with or without diabetes.
Treatment references
1. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al: Empagliflozin in heart failure with a preserved ejection
fraction. N Engl J Med 385(16):1451–1461, 2021. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2107038
2. Cowie MR, Fisher M: SGLT2 inhibitors: mechanisms of cardiovascular benefit beyond glycaemic
control. Nat Rev Cardiol 17(12):761–772, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-0406-8
3. Heerspink HJL, Stefánsson BV, Correa-Rotter R, et al: Dapagliflozin in patients with chronic
kidney disease. N Engl J Med 383(15):1436–1446, 2020. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2024816
4. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al: Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with empagliflozin in
heart failure. N Engl J Med 383(15):1413–1424, 2020. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2022190
Geriatrics Essentials: Edema
In older adults, use of medications that treat causes of edema (particularly heart failure) requires special
caution, such as the following:
Starting doses low and evaluating patients thoroughly when the dose is changed
Monitoring for orthostatic hypotension if diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor
blockers, or beta-blockers are used
Frequently testing for hypokalemia or hyperkalemia
Not stopping calcium channel blockers because of pedal edema, which is benign
Logging daily weight helps immensely in monitoring clinical improvement or deterioration.
Key Points
Edema may result from a generalized or local process and may occur anywhere in the
body.
Main causes of generalized edema are chronic heart, liver, and kidney disorders.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 10/11
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 13:51 Edema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Not all edema is serious; consequences depend mainly on the cause.
Sudden onset should trigger prompt evaluation.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/edema 11/11
