=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Erythromelalgia - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:47.373073",
  "file_size_bytes": 151726,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Erythromelalgia - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Erythromelalgia - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Erythromelalgia
By William Schuyler Jones, MD, Duke University Health System
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jul 2025
Erythromelalgia is distressing paroxysmal vasodilation of small arteries in the
feet and hands and, less commonly, in the face, ears, or knees; it causes
burning pain, increased skin temperature, and redness.
This rare disorder may be:
Primary (cause unknown)
It may also be secondary to:
Diabetes mellitus
Gout
Hypertension
Lichen sclerosus
Multiple sclerosis
Myeloproliferative disorders (eg, polycythemia vera, thrombocythemia)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Spinal cord disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Venous insufficiency
Less commonly, the disorder is related to the use of some medications (eg, nifedipine, bromocriptine).
A rare hereditary form of erythromelalgia starts at birth or during childhood.
Symptoms include burning pain, heat, and redness (in individuals with light skin) or a deepening of
baseline coloration (in individuals with dark skin) in the feet or hands that lasts a few minutes to several
hours. In most patients, symptoms are triggered by warmth (temperatures of 29 to 32° C) or by
exercise, and are typically relieved by immersion in ice water. Trophic changes (thin, shiny, or discolored
skin; hair loss; brittle nails) do not occur. Symptoms may remain mild for years or become severe
enough to cause total disability. Generalized vasomotor dysfunction is common, and Raynaud
phenomenon may occur.
 1/2

 Erythromelalgia - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagnosis of erythromelalgia is clinical (1). Testing is performed to detect causes. Genetic testing for a
causative SCN9A mutation may be performed in primary erythromelalgia. Because erythromelalgia may
precede a myeloproliferative disorder by several years, repeated blood counts may be indicated.
Differential diagnosis includes posttraumatic reflex dystrophies, shoulder-hand syndrome, peripheral
neuropathy, causalgia, Fabry disease, and bacterial cellulitis.
Treatment of erythromelalgia is warmth avoidance, rest, elevation of the extremity, and application of
cold (2). For primary erythromelalgia, multiple topical (eg, lidocaine, combination of amitriptyline and
ketamine, midodrine, capsaicin, menthol) or oral (eg, mexiletine, carbamazepine) medications may be
used. For secondary erythromelalgia, the underlying disorder is treated; aspirin may be helpful when a
myeloproliferative disorder is the cause. Gabapentin, venlafaxine, and sertraline may also be of benefit
for both primary and secondary forms.
References
1. Caldito EG, Kaul S, Caldito NG, Piette W, Mehta S. Erythromelalgia. Part I: Pathogenesis, clinical
features, evaluation, and complications. J Am Acad Dermatol 2024;90(3):453-462.
doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.071
2. Caldito EG, Caldito NG, Kaul S, Piette W, Mehta S. Erythromelalgia. Part II: Differential diagnoses
and management. J Am Acad Dermatol 2024;90(3):465-474. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2023.02.070
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 2/2
