Fibromuscular Dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia includes a heterogenous group of nonatherosclerotic,
noninflammatory arterial changes, causing some degree of vascular stenosis,
occlusion, or aneurysm.
Fibromuscular dysplasia usually occurs in women aged 40 to 60 years (1). The cause is unknown.
However, there may be a genetic component, and smoking may be a risk factor. Fibromuscular
dysplasia overlaps clinically with certain connective tissue disorders (eg, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type 4,
cystic medial necrosis, hereditary nephritis), and neurofibromatosis) (2).
Medial dysplasia, the most common type, is characterized by alternating regions of thick and thin
fibromuscular ridges containing collagen along the media. In perimedial dysplasia, extensive collagen
deposition occurs in the outer half of the media.
Fibromuscular dysplasia may affect the renal arteries (in 88% of patients), carotid and intracranial
arteries (25% of patients), intra-abdominal arteries (14% of patients), and upper (3% of patients) or
lower (10% of patients) extremity arteries (3).
Fibromuscular dysplasia is usually asymptomatic regardless of location. Signs and symptoms, when they
occur, vary by location:
Carotid arteries: Symptoms of a transient ischemic attack or stroke (typically attributed to
spontaneous carotid dissection)
Intra-abdominal arteries: Symptoms of mesenteric ischemia (rare)
Intracranial arteries: Symptoms of brain aneurysm
Leg arteries: Claudication in the thighs and calves, femoral bruits, and decreased femoral
pulses
Renal arteries: Renovascular hypertension
Ultrasound may suggest the diagnosis, but definitive diagnosis of fibromuscular dysplasia is made by
angiography showing focal or multifocal arterial stenoses, potentially with associated aneurysm or
tortuosity. Appearance may be beaded in medial or perimedial dysplasia, or a concentric band or long,
smooth narrowing in other forms (2).
 1/3
 
Screening of other vascular beds with duplex ultrasound, CT angiography, or magnetic resonance
angiography is recommended when fibromuscular dysplasia is initially diagnosed (2).
Fibromuscular Dysplasia of the Renal Artery
Hide Details
This image shows the classic "string of beads" sign (arrow) in a patient with fibromuscular
dysplasia of the renal artery.
Treatment of fibromuscular dysplasia varies by location. It may involve percutaneous transluminal
angioplasty alone, percutaneous stent angioplasty, bypass surgery, or aneurysm repair. Smoking
cessation is important. Control of other risk factors for atherosclerosis (hypertension, dyslipidemia,
diabetes) helps prevent accelerated development of flow-limiting arterial stenoses.
Fibromuscular Dysplasia Lesions and Affects Clinical Decisions: The ARCADIA-POL
Key Points
Fibromuscular dysplasia is most common in women age 40 to 60 years.
Patients who have connective tissue disease, who smoke, or who have a family history
are at higher risk.
Treatment depends on the location and includes angioplasty, bypass surgery, or
aneurysm repair.
