=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Heart sounds - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:39.636157",
  "file_size_bytes": 571324,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Heart sounds - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Heart sounds
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1]
(mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com);
Associate Editor-In-Chief: Cafer Zorkun, M.D.,
Ph.D. [2] (mailto:czorkun@wikidoc.org)
Overview
The heart sounds are the noises (sound) generated
by the beating heart and the resultant flow of blood
through it. This is also called a heartbeat. In
cardiac auscultation, an examiner uses a stethoscope
to listen for these sounds, which provide important
information about the condition of the heart.
A picture showing the location of the heart valves
and which sound they create
In healthy adults, there are two normal heart
sounds often described as a lub and a dub (or dup),
that occur in sequence with each heart beat. These are the first
heart sound (S ) and second heart sound (S ), produced by
1 2
the closure of the AV valves and semilunar valves respectively. In
addition to these normal sounds, a variety of other sounds may be
present including heart murmurs and adventitious sounds.
Heart murmurs are generated by turbulent flow of blood, which
may occur inside or outside the heart. Murmurs may be
physiological (benign) or pathological (abnormal). Abnormal
murmurs can be caused by stenosis restricting the opening of a
heart valve, causing turbulence as blood flows through it. Valve
insufficiency (or regurgitation) allows backflow of blood when the
Diagram showing relations of
incompetent valve is supposed to be closed. Different murmurs are
opened heart to front of thoracic
audible in different parts of the cardiac cycle, depending on the
wall. Ant. Anterior segment of
cause of the murmur. tricuspid valve. A O. Aorta. A.P.
Anterior papillary muscle. In.
Normal heart sounds Innominate artery. L.C.C. Left
common carotid artery. L.S. Left
{{#ev:youtube|xS3jX1FYG-M}} subclavian artery. L.V. Left
ventricle. P.A. Pulmonary artery.
R.A. Right atrium. R.V. Right
{{#ev:youtube|NeMJXMSkA7g}} ventricle. V.S. Ventricular
septum.
First heart tone S , the "lub"(components M and
1 1
T )
1
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
 1/8

The first heart tone, or S , is caused by the sudden block of reverse blood flow due to closure of the
1
atrioventricular valves, mitral and tricuspid, at the beginning of ventricular contraction, or systole.
When the pressure in the ventricles rises above the pressure in the atria, venous blood flow
entering the ventricles is pushed back toward the atria, catching the valve leaflets, closing the inlet
valves and preventing regurgitation of blood from the ventricles back into the atria. The S sound
1
results from reverberation within the blood associated with the sudden block of flow reversal by
the valves. [1]
Second heart tone S the "dub"(components A and P )
2 2 2
The second heart tone, or S , is caused by the sudden block of reversing blood flow due to closure
2
of the aortic valve and pulmonary valve at the end of ventricular systole, i.e beginning of
ventricular diastole. As the left ventricle empties, its pressure falls below the pressure in the aorta,
aortic blood flow quickly reverses back toward the left ventricle, catching the aortic valve leaflets
and is stopped by aortic (outlet) valve closure. Similarly, as the pressure in the right ventricle falls
below the pressure in the pulmonary artery, the pulmonary (outlet) valve closes. The S sound
2
results from reverberation within the blood associated with the sudden block of flow reversal.
Splitting of the second heart sound
{{#ev:youtube|5tBk1XuEyuM}}
Physiologic Splitting
During inspiration, negative intrathoracic pressure causes increased blood return into the right
side of the heart, yet some slowing of emptying from the left side. The increased blood volume in
the right ventricle causes the pulmonary valve to stay open longer during ventricular systole. This
causes an increased delay in the P component of S relative to the A component. This is defined
2 2 2
as physiologic splitting of S . During expiration, the positive intrathoracic pressure causes
2
decreased blood return to the right side of the heart. The reduced volume in the right ventricle
allows the pulmonary valve to close earlier at the end of ventricular systole, causing P to occur
2
earlier, and "closer" to A . It is physiological to hear a "splitting" of the second heart tone in
2
younger people, during inspiration and in the "pulmonary area", i.e. the 2nd ICS (intercostal
space) at the left edge of the sternum. During expiration, the interval between the two components
normally shortens and the S2 sounds becomes merged.
Persistent Splitting
Persistent splitting of S is seen in right bundle branch block (RBBB) and pulmonary hypertension.
2
Because of the delayed activation of the right heart in RBBB the pulmonary valve closure is delayed
causing a split in the second heart sound which is persistent in both inspiration and expiration.
Paradoxical Splitting
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 2/8

This phenomenon is seen in left bundle branch block (LBBB), aortic stenosis, severe heart failure
and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Delayed activation of the left ventricle and in turn delayed
closure of the aortic valve causes the pulmonic component of the second heart sound to occur
before the aortic component. This split is better appreciated while expiration than during
inspiration.
Fixed Splitting
If this splitting does not vary with inspiration, it is termed "fixed split S2" and is usually due to an
atrial septal defect (ASD) or ventricular septal defect (VSD). The ASD or VSD creates a left to right
shunt that increases the blood flow to the right side of the heart, thereby causing the pulmonic
valve to close later than the aortic valve independent of inspiration/expiration.
Loud P
2
Pulmonary hypertension is the most common cause of a loud P . When the pulmonary artery
2
pressures are more than 50 mm Hg a loud pulmonic component of S is heard in the left second
2
intercostal space (pulmonic area). Pulmonary hypertension is also a caiuse of persistent splitting of
S .
2
Extra heart sounds
Infrequently extra heart sounds are heard in both normal and abnormal situations. A gallop
rhythm refers to a (usually abnormal) rhythm of the heart on auscultation. The normal heart
rhythm contains two audible sounds, called S and S , giving the well-known "lub-dub" rhythm.
1 2
They are caused by the closing of valves in the heart. A gallop rhythm contains another sound,
called S or S , dependent upon where in the cycle this added sound comes; it can also contain
3 4
both of these sounds.
Third heart sound S
3
Rarely, there may be a third heart sound S3. S (or third heart sound) is the name of the vibration
3
which occurs during early diastole, shortly after the second heart sound S , giving a rhythm much
2
like the cadence in the word 'Kentucky'. It can be a normal finding in people under 40 years of age,
but over this age is usually a sign of heart failure. It is usually low-pitched and difficult to hear, and
is best heard with the bell of the stethoscope. An S rhythm is also known as ventricular gallop. The
3
third heart sound or protodiastolic sound is not of valvular origin, as it occurs at the beginning
of diastole just after S2. This sound occurs when the left ventricle is not very compliant, and at the
beginning of diastole the rush of blood into the left ventricle suddenly is halted, resulting in a
vibration of the ventricle and surrounding structures.
The third heart sound is normal in children and young adults, but disappears before middle age.
Abnormal reemergence of this sound late in life indicates a pathological state, often a sign of a
failing left ventricle as in dilated congestive heart failure (CHF). This sound is called a
protodiastolic gallop or ventricular gallop, a type of gallop rhythm.
Pathophysiology and Etiology
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 3/8

It is caused by the sudden slowing of blood rushing in from the atrium into the ventricle as it is
relaxing.
Differential Diagnosis of Causes of an S
3
It is associated with heart failure, caused by conditions which have:
Rapid ventricular filling
• Mitral regurgitation - this is when one of the heart valves that usually stops blood going from
the left ventricle to the left atria fails, allowing blood into the atria during systole. This means
they will be overfilled when they come to contract, leading to the rapid ventricular filling.
• Elevated left atrial and left ventricular filling pressures, usually a result of a stiffened and
dilated left ventricle
• Ventricular septal defect - this is a hole in the wall between the two ventricles, which allows
rapid filling from the other ventricle.
• Elevated atrial pressure
• High-output states
Poor Left Ventricular Function
• Post-MI - the death of tissue in the ventricular wall due to loss of blood supply causes areas
which do not move as well, if at all (hypokinetic and akinetic), meaning they do not relax quickly
enough so the ventricular filling is relatively too quick.
• Dilated cardiomyopathy - the ventricular walls are abnormal for a variety of reasons, and
become thin and stiff so do not relax well.
• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
• Cardiomegaly of a variety of causes
In conditions affecting the pericardium or diseases that primarily affect the heart muscle
(restrictive cardiomyopathies) a similar sound can be heard, but is usually more high-pitched and
is called a 'pericardial knock'.
The S3 can also be confused with a widely split S2, or a mitral opening snap, but these sounds are
typically of much higher pitch and occur closer to the onset of S2.
Treatment
The gallop rhythm itself does not need to be treated; the underlying cause requires correction;
depending on the etiology the gallop rhythm may resolve following treatment.
Fourth heart sound S
4
S (or fourth heart sound) occurs just before S (thus right at the end of one whole cycle), giving a
4 1
cadence like the word 'Tennessee'. It is never normal. If the problem lies with the left ventricle, the
gallop rhythm will be heard best at the cardiac apex (the point of the two ventricles). It will become
more apparent with exercise, with the patient lying on their left-hand side, or with the patient
holding expiration. If the culprit is the right ventricle, the abnormal rhythm will be most evident
on the lower left hand side of the sternum, and will get louder with exercise and quick, deep
inspiration [2]. The fourth heart sound S4 is sometimes audible in healthy children, but when
audible in an adult is called a presystolic gallop or atrial gallop. This gallop is a sign of a
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 4/8

pathologic state, usually a failing left ventricle. This sound occurs just after atrial contraction
("atrial kick") and is the sound of blood being forced into a stiff/hypertrophic left ventricle. The
combined presence of S3 and S4 is a quadruple gallop. At rapid heart rates, S3 and S4 may
merge to produce a summation gallop.
Pathophysiology and Etiology
It is caused by the atria contracting forcefully in an effort to overcome an abnormally-stiff
ventricle.
Differential Diagnosis of Causes of an S
4
The S rhythm is associated with disorders that increases the stiffness of the ventricle, including:
4
• Long-standing hypertension
• Aortic stenosis
• Overload of the ventricle
• Fibrosis of the ventricle
• Left ventricular hypertrophy
• Coronary Artery Disease
• Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
• Pulmonary Hypertension
Treatment
Again, the rhythm itself does not require treatment; the underlying cause of ventricular stiffness or
dysfunction does.
Summation Gallop
If a fast heart rate (tachycardia) is present along and S and S both occur, the rate may become
3 4
high enough so that the distinction between the two sounds is lost, and they summate into a single
sound.
Abnormal sounds
Aortic area, pulmonic area, tricuspid area and mitral area are the area where we auscultate the
heart. Heart murmurs are produced as a result of turbulent flow of blood, turbulence sufficient
to produce audible noise. They usually are heard as a whooshing sound. The term murmur only
refers to a sound believed to originating within blood flow through or near the heart; rapid blood
velocity is necessary to produce a murmur. Though not fully reliable, soft murmurs are less likely
to reflect a serious, if any, health problem; loud murmurs essentially always reflect a problem. Yet
most heart problems do not produce any murmur and most valve problems also do not produce an
audible murmur.
The following paragraphs overview the murmurs most commonly heard in adults, adults who do
not have major congenital heart abnormalities.
• Regurgitation through the mitral valve is by far the most commonly heard murmur, sometimes
fairly loud to a practiced ear, even though the volume of regurgitant blood flow may be quite
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 5/8

small. Yet, though often obvious, probably about 20% of cases of mitral regurgitation, though
obvious using echocardiography visualization, do not produce an audible murmur.
• Stenosis of the aortic valve is typically the next most commonly heart murmur, a systolic
ejection murmur. This is more common in older adults or in those individuals having a two, not a
three leaflet aortic valve.
• Regurgitation through the aortic valve, if marked, is sometimes audible to a practiced ear with
a high quality, especially electronically amplified, stethoscope. Generally, this is a very rarely
heard murmur, even though aortic valve regurgitation is not so rare. Aortic regurgition, though
obvious using echocardiography visualization, usually does not produce an audible murmur.
• Stenosis of the mitral valve, if severe, also rarely produces an audible, low frequency soft
rumbling murmur, best recognized by a practiced ear using a high quality, especially
electronically amplified, stethoscope.
• Either regurgitation through, or stenosis of, the tricuspid or pulmonary valves essentially never
produces audible murmurs.
• Other audible murmurs are associated with abnormal openings between the left ventricle and
right heart or from the aortic or pulmonary arteries back into a lower pressure heart chamber.
Gradations of
Murmurs[3] (
Grade Description
Very faint, heard only after
Grade 1 listener has "tuned in"; may not
be heard in all positions.
Quiet, but heard immediately
Grade 2 after placing the stethoscope on
the chest.
Grade 3 Moderately loud.
Grade 4 Loud, with palpable thrill.
Very loud, with thrill. May be
Grade 5 heard when stethoscope is
partly off the chest.
Very loud, with thrill. May be
Grade 6 heard with stethoscope entirely
off the chest.
As noted, several different cardiac conditions can cause heart murmurs. However, the murmurs
produced often change in complex ways with the severity of the cardiac disease. An astute
physician can sometimes diagnose cardiac conditions with some accuracy based largely on the
murmur, related physical examination and experience with the relative frequency of different heart
conditions. However, with the advent of better quality and wider availability of echocardiography
and other techniques, heart status can be recognized and quantified much more accurately than
formerly possible with only a stethoscope, examination and experience.
Clicks: With the advent of newer, non-invasive imaging techniques, the origin of other, so-called
adventitial sounds or "clicks" has been appreciated. These are short, high-pitched sounds. There
are two types of clicks, ejection click and non-ejection click.
• Ejection clicks are caused by bicuspid aortic valve and bicuspid pulmonary valve early in the
systole.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 6/8

• Non-ejection clicks are seen in mitral valve prolapse, ventricular septal aneurysm, atrial septal
aneurysm, cardiac tumors, pulmonary hypertension and systemic hypertension. Patients with
mitral valve prolapse may have a mid-systolic click along with a murmur.
• The atrioventricular valves of patients with mitral stenosis may open with an opening snap on
the beginning of diastole.
Rubs: Patients with pericarditis, an inflammation of the sac surrounding the heart (pericardium),
may have an audible pericardial friction rub. This is a characteristic scratching, creaking, high-
pitched sound emanating from the rubbing of both layers of inflammated pericardium. It is the
loudest in systole, but can often be heard also at the beginning and at the end of diastole. It is very
dependent on body position and breathing, and changes from hour to hour.
There are a number of interventions that can be performed that alter the intensity and
characteristics of abnormal heart sounds. These interventions can be performed to differentiate the
different heart sounds and obtain a diagnosis of the cardiac anomaly that causes the heart sound.
(See Heart murmur#Interventions that change murmur sounds.)
Inhalation pressure also causes an increase in the venous blood return to the right side of the
heart. Therefore, right-sided murmurs generally increase in intensity with inspiration. The
increased volume of blood entering the right sided chambers of the heart restricts the amount of
blood entering the left sided chambers of the heart. This causes left-sided murmurs to generally
decrease in intensity during inspiration.
With expiration, the opposite haemodynamic changes occur. This means that left-sided murmurs
generally increase in intensity with expiration. Having the patient lie supine and raising their legs
up to a 45 degree angle facilitates an increase in venous return to the right side of the heart
producing effects similar to inhalation-increased blood flow.
Surface anatomy
The opening and closing of the valves is usually much less loud than the sound of the blood rushing
through the valve and "colliding" with the subsequent barrier. Because of this, auscultation to
determine function of a valve is usually not performed at the position of the valve, but at a
downstream position where the listener can best hear the blood colliding after the valve is closed.
Pulmonary valve (to pulmonary trunk) second intercostal space left upper sternal border
Aortic valve (to aorta) second intercostal space right upper sternal border
Mitral valve (to left ventricle) fifth intercostal space lateral to left midclavicular line
Tricuspid valve (to right ventricle) fourth intercostal space lower left sternal border
One can remember the positions of the sounds by the mnemonic "All The Presidents Men". [3]
• A - Aortic - Right second intercostal space
• T - Tricuspid - Left fourth intercostal space sternal border
• P - Pulmonic - Left second intercostal space sternal border
• M - Mitral - Fifth intercostal space lateral to left midclavicular line
Recording heart sounds
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 7/8

With the advent of electronic stethoscopes, it is now possible to conveniently record heart sounds.
One electronic stethoscope provides a port to output stethoscope sounds to an external recording
device, such as a notebook computer or MP3 recorder. The same connection can then be used to
listen to the recordings through the stethoscope headphones, allowing for faithful reproduction of
low-frequency murmurs and other heart sounds.
Related Chapters
• Physical examination
• Precordial examination
• Anatomy
• Heart
• Heart valve
• Aortic valve
• Pulmonary valve
• Mitral valve
• Tricuspid valve
• Pathophysiology
• Mitral stenosis
• Mitral regurgitation
• Aortic stenosis
• Aortic insufficiency
• Pulmonary stenosis
• Pulmonary insufficiency
• Tricuspid stenosis
• Tricuspid insufficiency
• Heart murmur
• Benign paediatric heart murmur
• Pulsatile Tinnitus - hearing a heartbeat sound in one or both ears
References
External links
• Pubmed.com ( - journal article
on diastolic gallop sounds
Template:WikiDoc Sources
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 8/8
