=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:08.146583",
  "file_size_bytes": 296032,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Hypertensive Emergencies
(Acute Severe Hypertension)
By Matthew R. Weir, MD, University of Maryland School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 | Modified Dec 2025
A hypertensive emergency is severe hypertension (often defined as systolic
blood pressure (BP) ≥ 180 mm Hg and/or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 120 mm Hg)
with signs of damage to target organs (primarily the brain, cardiovascular
system, and kidneys). Diagnosis is by BP measurement, ECG, urinalysis, and
serum electrolyte and creatinine measurements. Treatment is immediate BP
reduction with IV antihypertensives.
(See also Hypertension.)
Signs of target-organ damage include (1):
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hypertensive retinopathy
Preeclampsia or eclampsia
Acute left ventricular failure with pulmonary edema
Myocardial ischemia
Acute aortic dissection
Renal failure
Damage is rapidly progressive and sometimes fatal.
Hypertensive encephalopathy may involve a failure of cerebral autoregulation of blood flow.
Normally, as blood pressure increases, cerebral vessels constrict to maintain constant cerebral
perfusion. Above a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of about 160 mm Hg (lower for people who are
normotensive whose BP suddenly increases), the cerebral vessels begin to dilate rather than remain
constricted. As a result, the very high BP is transmitted directly to the capillary bed with transudation
and exudation of plasma into the brain, causing cerebral edema, including papilledema.
Although many patients with stroke and intracranial hemorrhage present with elevated BP, elevated BP
is often a consequence rather than a cause of the condition. Whether rapidly lowering BP is beneficial in
these conditions is unclear (2); it may even be harmful.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 1/7
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Mean Vascular Pressure (systemic or pulmonary)
Hypertensive urgencies
Severe hypertension (eg, systolic pressure > 180 mm Hg) without target-organ damage (except perhaps
grades 1 to 2 retinopathy) may be considered a hypertensive urgency. Although BP at these very high
levels often concerns clinicians, acute complications are unlikely, so immediate BP reduction is not
required.
Anxiety is by far the most common cause of hypertensive urgency. Treating the anxiety by counseling
and/or use of anxiety-alleviating medications is often helpful in reducing BP (3) and thus reducing the
incidence of hypertensive urgencies. If elevated BP persists, patients should be started on medications,
such as combination therapy with 2 oral antihypertensives (for severe hypertension), and closely
evaluated for treatment efficacy on an outpatient basis.
General references
1. Writing Committee Members*, Jones DW, Ferdinand KC, et al. 2025
AHA/ACC/AANP/AAPA/ABC/ACCP/ACPM/AGS/AMA/ASPC/NMA/PCNA/SGIM Guideline for the
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2025;82(10):e212-e316. doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000249
2. Buonacera A, Stancanelli B, Malatino L. Stroke and Hypertension: An Appraisal from
Pathophysiology to Clinical Practice. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2019;17(1):72-84.
doi:10.2174/1570161115666171116151051
3. McEvoy JW, McCarthy CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of elevated
blood pressure and hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2024;45(38):3912-4018.
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehae178
Symptoms and Signs of Hypertensive Emergencies
Blood pressure is elevated, often markedly (systolic pressure > 180 mm Hg and/or diastolic pressure ≥
120 mm Hg). Central nervous system symptoms include rapidly changing neurologic abnormalities (eg,
confusion, transient cortical blindness, hemiparesis, hemisensory defects, seizures). Cardiovascular
symptoms include chest pain and dyspnea. Renal involvement may be asymptomatic, although severe
azotemia due to advanced renal failure may cause lethargy or nausea.
Physical examination focuses on target organs, with neurologic examination, fundoscopy, and
cardiovascular examination. Global cerebral deficits (eg, confusion, obtundation, coma), with or without
focal deficits, suggest encephalopathy; normal mental status with focal deficits suggests stroke.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 2/7
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Severe retinopathy (sclerosis, cotton-wool spots, arteriolar narrowing, hemorrhage, papilledema) is
usually present with hypertensive encephalopathy, and some degree of retinopathy is present in many
other hypertensive emergencies.
Jugular venous distention, basilar lung crackles, and a third heart sound suggest pulmonary edema.
Asymmetry of pulses between arms suggests aortic dissection.
Diagnosis of Hypertensive Emergencies
Systolic blood pressure > 180 mm Hg
Testing to identify target-organ involvement: ECG, urinalysis, serum electrolytes, and
creatinine; if neurologic findings, head CT
Testing typically includes ECG, urinalysis, serum electrolytes, and creatinine.
Patients with neurologic findings require head CT to diagnose intracranial bleeding, edema, or
infarction.
Patients with chest pain or dyspnea require an ECG and chest radiograph. ECG abnormalities suggesting
acute target-organ damage include acute ischemic changes.
Urinalysis abnormalities typical of renal involvement include red blood cells (RBCs), RBC casts, and
proteinuria.
Diagnosis is based on the presence of a BP > 180 mm Hg and findings of target-organ involvement.
Treatment of Hypertensive Emergencies
Initiate short-acting IV medication (eg, labetalol, clevidipine, esmolol) in the emergency
department
Admit to intensive care unit (ICU) where titratable IV medications (eg, nitroprusside,
fenoldopam, nicardipine) can be monitored
Goal: 20 to 25% reduction MAP in 1 to 2 hours
Hypertensive emergencies are treated in an ICU; blood pressure is progressively (although not abruptly)
reduced using a short-acting, titratable IV medication. Choice of medication and speed and degree of
reduction vary somewhat with the target organ involved, but generally a 20 to 25% reduction in MAP
over about an hour or two is appropriate, with further titration based on symptoms. Achieving “normal”
BP urgently is not necessary. Typical first-line medications include nitroprusside, fenoldopam,
nicardipine, and labetalol (see table Parenteral Medications for Hypertensive Emergencies).
Nitroglycerin alone is less potent.
TABLE
Parenteral Medications for Hypertensive Emergencies
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 3/7
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Selected Adverse
Medication Special Indications
Effects*
Most hypertensive
emergencies
Atrial fibrillation, fever,
Clevidipine insomnia, nausea, Should be used cautiously
headache in patients with acute
heart failure
Acute left ventricular
failure
Precipitous fall in blood
Enalaprilat pressure in high-renin Should be avoided in
states, variable response acute myocardial
infarction
Aortic dissection
Esmolol Hypotension, nausea
perioperatively
Most hypertensive
Tachycardia, headache,
emergencies
nausea, flushing,
Fenoldopam hypokalemia, elevation of
Should be used cautiously
intraocular pressure in
in patients with
patients with glaucoma
myocardial ischemia
Tachycardia, flushing,
Hydralazine headache, vomiting, Eclampsia
aggravation of angina
Most hypertensive
Vomiting, scalp tingling,
emergencies, except acute
burning in throat,
left ventricular failure
Labetalol dizziness, nausea, heart
block, orthostatic Should be avoided in
hypotension patients with asthma
Most hypertensive
emergencies, except acute
heart failure
Tachycardia, headache,
Nicardipine
flushing, local phlebitis
Should be used cautiously
in patients with
myocardial ischemia
Nitroglycerin Headache, tachycardia, Myocardial ischemia, heart
nausea, vomiting, failure
apprehension,
restlessness, muscular
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 4/7
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Selected Adverse
Medication Special Indications
Effects*
twitching, palpitations,
methemoglobinemia,
tolerance with prolonged
use
Nausea, vomiting,
Most hypertensive
agitation, muscle
emergencies
twitching, sweating, cutis
Should be used cautiously
Nitroprusside anserina (if blood pressure
in patients with high
is reduced too rapidly),
intracranial pressure or
thiocyanate and cyanide
azotemia
toxicity
Rarely used unless patient
Tachycardia, flushing,
Phentolamine has a confirmed diagnosis
headache
of pheochromocytoma
* Hypotension may occur with all medications.
† A special delivery system (eg, infusion pump for nitroprusside, nonpolyvinyl chloride
tubing for nitroglycerin) is required.
Oral medications are not indicated because onset is variable and the medications are difficult to titrate.
Although short-acting oral nifedipine reduces blood pressure rapidly, it may lead to acute hypotension,
which may lead to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular ischemic events (sometimes fatal) and is
therefore not recommended.
Clevidipine is an ultra-short-acting (within 1 to 2 minutes), third-generation calcium channel blocker
that reduces peripheral resistance without affecting venous vascular tone and cardiac filling pressures.
Clevidipine is rapidly hydrolyzed by blood esterases and, thus, its metabolism is not affected by renal or
hepatic function. It has been shown to be effective and safe in the control of perioperative hypertension
and hypertensive emergencies and was associated with lower mortality than nitroprusside (1).
Clevidipine may thus be preferred over nitroprusside for most hypertensive emergencies, although it
should be used with caution in acute heart failure with reduced ejection fraction as it may have negative
inotropic effects. If clevidipine is not available, then fenoldopam, nitroglycerin, or nicardipine are
reasonable alternatives.
Fenoldopam is a peripheral dopamine-1 agonist that causes systemic and renal vasodilation and
natriuresis. Onset is rapid and half-life is brief, making it an effective alternative to nitroprusside, with
the added benefit that it does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 5/7
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Labetalol is a beta-blocker with some alpha-1-blocking effects, thus causing vasodilation without the
typical accompanying reflex tachycardia. It can be given as a constant infusion or as frequent boluses;
use of boluses has not been shown to cause significant hypotension. Labetalol is used during
pregnancy, for intracranial disorders requiring BP control, and after myocardial infarction. Adverse
effects are minimal, but because of its beta -blocking activity, labetalol should not be used for
hypertensive emergencies in patients with asthma. Low doses may be used for left ventricular failure if
nitroglycerin is given simultaneously.
Nitroprusside is a venous and arterial dilator, reducing preload and afterload. Data show increased
mortality with nitroprusside compared to clevidipine, nitroglycerin, and nicardipine, and thus
nitroprusside should not be used when other alternatives are available. Its use is mostly limited to
patients with acute decompensated heart failure who are hypertensive. It is also used for hypertensive
encephalopathy and, with beta-blockers, for aortic dissection. The medication is rapidly broken down
into cyanide and nitric oxide (the active moiety). Cyanide is detoxified to thiocyanate. However,
administration of > 2 mcg/kg/minute can lead to cyanide accumulation with toxicity to the central
nervous system and heart; manifestations include agitation, seizures, cardiac instability, and an anion
gap metabolic acidosis.
Prolonged administration of nitroprusside (> 1 week or, in patients with renal insufficiency, 3 to 6 days)
leads to accumulation of thiocyanate, which can result in lethargy, tremor, abdominal pain, and
vomiting. Other adverse effects include transitory elevation of hair follicles (cutis anserina) if BP is
reduced too rapidly. Thiocyanate levels should be monitored daily after 3 consecutive days of therapy,
and the medication should be stopped if the serum thiocyanate level is > 12 mg/dL (> 2 mmol/L).
Because nitroprusside is broken down by ultraviolet light, the IV bag and tubing are wrapped in an
opaque covering.
Nitroglycerin is a vasodilator that affects veins more than arterioles. It can be used to manage
hypertension during and after coronary artery bypass graft surgery, acute myocardial infarction,
unstable angina pectoris, and acute pulmonary edema. IV nitroglycerin is preferable to nitroprusside for
patients with severe coronary artery disease because nitroglycerin increases coronary flow, whereas
nitroprusside tends to decrease coronary flow to ischemic areas, possibly because of a “steal”
mechanism.
For long-term BP control, nitroglycerin must be used with other medications. The most common
adverse effect is headache, occurring in the majority of patients (2); others include tachycardia, nausea,
vomiting, apprehension, restlessness, muscular twitching, and palpitations.
Nicardipine, a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker with less negative inotropic effects than
nifedipine, acts primarily as a vasodilator. It is most often used for postoperative hypertension and
during pregnancy. It may cause flushing, headache, and tachycardia; it can decrease glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) in patients with renal insufficiency.
Treatment references
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 6/7
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:47 Hypertensive Emergencies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Mean Vascular Pressure (systemic or pulmonary)
1. Aronson S, Dyke CM, Stierer KA, et al. The ECLIPSE trials: comparative studies of clevidipine to
nitroglycerin, sodium nitroprusside, and nicardipine for acute hypertension treatment in cardiac
surgery patients. Anesth Analg. 2008;107(4):1110-1121. doi:10.1213/ane.0b013e31818240db
2. Tfelt-Hansen PC, Tfelt-Hansen J. Nitroglycerin headache and nitroglycerin-induced primary
headaches from 1846 and onwards: a historical overview and an update. Headache.
2009;49(3):445-456. doi:10.1111/j.1526-4610.2009.01342.x
Key Points
A hypertensive emergency is significantly elevated blood pressure (eg, systolic blood
pressure > 180 mm Hg and/or diastolic pressure ≥ 120 mm Hg) that causes target-organ
damage; it requires intravenous therapy and hospitalization.
Target-organ damage includes hypertensive encephalopathy, preeclampsia and
eclampsia, acute left ventricular failure with pulmonary edema, myocardial ischemia,
acute aortic dissection, and renal failure.
Do ECG and urinalysis, measure serum electrolytes and creatinine, and, for patients with
neurologic symptoms or signs, obtain head CT.
Reduce mean arterial pressure by about 20 to 25% over the first hour using a short-
acting, titratable IV medication such as clevidipine, nitroglycerin, fenoldopam,
nicardipine, or labetalol.
It is not necessary to achieve “normal” blood pressure urgently (especially true in acute
stroke).
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/hypertension/hypertensive-emergencies 7/7
