=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:53.383898",
  "file_size_bytes": 555147,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Hypothyroidism
(Myxedema)
By Laura Boucai, MD, Weill Cornell Medical College
Reviewed By Glenn D. Braunstein, MD, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2024 | Modified Jun 2024
Hypothyroidism is thyroid hormone deficiency. Symptoms include cold
intolerance, fatigue, and weight gain. Signs may include a typical facial
appearance, hoarse slow speech, and dry skin. Diagnosis is with thyroid
function tests. Management includes administration of thyroxine.
(See also Overview of Thyroid Function.)
Hypothyroidism occurs at any age but is particularly common among older adults, where it may present
subtly and be difficult to recognize. Hypothyroidism may be
Primary: Caused by disease in the thyroid
Secondary: Caused by disease in the hypothalamus or pituitary
Primary hypothyroidism
Primary hypothyroidism is due to decreased secretion of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) from
the thyroid. Serum T4 and T3 levels are low, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level is increased. In
the United States, the most common cause is autoimmune inflammation. It usually results from
Hashimoto thyroiditis and is often associated with a firm goiter or, later in the disease process, with a
shrunken fibrotic thyroid with little or no function.
The second most common cause is treatment for hyperthyroidism (post-therapeutic hypothyroidism),
especially after radioactive iodine therapy or surgery for hyperthyroidism, goiter, or thyroid cancer.
Hypothyroidism during overtreatment with propylthiouracil, methimazole, or iodide abates after
therapy is stopped.
Iodine deficiency may cause endemic goiter and goitrous hypothyroidism. Most patients with goiters not
caused by Hashimoto thyroiditis are euthyroid or have hyperthyroidism. Iodine deficiency decreases
thyroid hormonogenesis. In response, TSH is released, which causes the thyroid to enlarge and trap
iodine avidly; thus, goiter results. If iodine deficiency is severe, the patient becomes hypothyroid, a rare
occurrence in the United States since the advent of iodized salt.
 1/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Iodine deficiency can cause congenital hypothyroidism. In severely iodine-deficient regions worldwide,
congenital hypothyroidism (previously termed endemic cretinism) is a major cause of intellectual
disability.
Rare inherited enzymatic defects can alter the synthesis of thyroid hormone and cause goitrous
hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism may occur in patients taking lithium, perhaps because lithium inhibits hormone release
by the thyroid. Hypothyroidism may also occur in patients taking amiodarone or other iodine-containing
drugs, in patients taking interferon-alfa, and in patients being treated for cancer with checkpoint
inhibitors or some tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Hypothyroidism can result from radiation therapy for cancer of the larynx or Hodgkin lymphoma. The
incidence of permanent hypothyroidism after radiation therapy is high, and thyroid function (through
measurement of serum TSH) should be evaluated at 6- to 12-month intervals.
Secondary hypothyroidism
Secondary hypothyroidism occurs when the hypothalamus produces insufficient thyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) or the pituitary produces insufficient TSH.
Sometimes, deficient TSH secretion due to deficient TRH secretion is termed tertiary hypothyroidism.
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism is elevated serum TSH in patients with absent or minimal symptoms of
hypothyroidism and normal serum levels of free thyroxine (T4).
Subclinical thyroid dysfunction is relatively common; it occurs in approximately 15% of older females
and 10% of older males (1), particularly in those with underlying Hashimoto thyroiditis.
In patients with serum TSH > 10 mIU/L (> 10 microIU/mL), there is a high likelihood of progression to
overt hypothyroidism with low serum levels of free T4 within the next 10 years. These patients are also
more likely to have hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. They should be treated with
levothyroxine, even if they are asymptomatic.
For patients with TSH levels between 4.5 and 10 mUI/L, (4.5 and 10 microIU/L) a trial of levothyroxine is
reasonable if symptoms of early hypothyroidism (eg, fatigue, depression) are present.
Levothyroxine therapy is also indicated in pregnant women and in women who plan to become
pregnant to avoid deleterious effects of hypothyroidism on the pregnancy and fetal development.
Patients should have annual measurement of serum TSH and free T4 to assess progress of the
condition if untreated or to adjust the levothyroxine dosage.
General reference
1. Cappola AR, Fried LP, Arnold AM, et al. Thyroid status, cardiovascular risk, and mortality in older
adults. JAMA 2006;295(9):1033-1041. doi:10.1001/jama.295.9.1033
 2/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms and Signs of Hypothyroidism
Symptoms and signs of primary hypothyroidism are often subtle and insidious. The most common
presenting symptoms are fluid retention and puffiness, especially periorbitally, tiredness, cold
intolerance, and mental fogginess.
Various organ systems may be affected with many possible signs and symptoms, including
Metabolic: Cold intolerance, modest weight gain (due to fluid retention and decreased
metabolism), hypothermia
Neurologic: Forgetfulness, paresthesias of the hands and feet (often due to carpal tunnel
syndrome caused by deposition of proteinaceous ground substance in the ligaments
around the wrist and ankle); slowing of the relaxation phase of deep tendon reflexes
Psychiatric: Personality changes, depression, dull facial expression, dementia or frank
psychosis (myxedema madness)
Dermatologic: Facial puffiness; myxedema; sparse, coarse and dry hair; coarse, dry, scaly
and thick skin; carotenemia, particularly notable on the palms and soles (caused by
deposition of carotene in the lipid-rich epidermal layers); macroglossia due to deposition of
proteinaceous ground substance in the tongue
Ocular: Periorbital swelling due to infiltration with the mucopolysaccharides hyaluronic acid
and chondroitin sulfate, droopy eyelids because of decreased adrenergic drive
Gastrointestinal: Constipation
Gynecologic: Heavy menstrual bleeding or secondary amenorrhea
Cardiovascular: Slow heart rate (a decrease in both thyroid hormone and adrenergic
stimulation causes bradycardia), enlarged heart on examination and imaging (partly
because of dilation but chiefly because of pericardial effusion; pericardial effusions develop
slowly and only rarely cause hemodynamic distress)
Other: Pleural or abdominal effusions (pleural effusions develop slowly and only rarely
cause respiratory or hemodynamic distress), hoarse voice, and slow speech
 3/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Myxedema in Hypothyroidism
IMAGE
BY PERMISSION OF THE PUBLISHER. FROM BURMAN K, BECKER K, CYTRYN A, ET AL. IN ATLAS OF
CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGY: THYROID DISEASES. EDITED BY SG KORENMAN (SERIES EDITOR) AND MI
SURKS. PHILADELPHIA, CURRENT MEDICINE, 1999.
Symptoms can differ significantly in older patients.
Although secondary hypothyroidism is uncommon, its causes often affect other endocrine organs
controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. In a female with hypothyroidism, indications of secondary
hypothyroidism are a history of amenorrhea rather than heavy menstrual bleeding and some
suggestive differences on physical examination.
Secondary hypothyroidism is characterized by skin and hair that are dry but not very coarse, skin
depigmentation, only minimal macroglossia, atrophic breasts, and low blood pressure. Also, the heart is
small, and serous pericardial effusions do not occur. Hypoglycemia is common because of concomitant
adrenal insufficiency or growth hormone deficiency.
Myxedema coma
Myxedema coma is a life-threatening complication of hypothyroidism, usually occurring in patients with
a long history of hypothyroidism. Its characteristics include coma with extreme hypothermia
(temperature 24° to 32.2° C), areflexia, seizures, and respiratory depression with carbon dioxide
retention. Severe hypothermia may be missed unless low-reading thermometers are used. Rapid
diagnosis based on clinical judgment, history, and physical examination is imperative, because death is
likely without rapid treatment. Precipitating factors include illness, infection, trauma, medications or
substances that suppress the central nervous system, and exposure to cold.
Diagnosis of Hypothyroidism
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level
 4/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Free thyroxine (T4) level
Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone measurement is the most sensitive test for diagnosing
hypothyroidism. In primary hypothyroidism, there is decreased feedback inhibition of the intact
pituitary, and serum TSH is always elevated, whereas serum free T4 is low. In secondary
hypothyroidism, free T4 and serum TSH are low (sometimes TSH is normal but with decreased
bioactivity).
Many patients with primary hypothyroidism have normal circulating levels of triiodothyronine (T3),
probably caused by sustained TSH stimulation of the failing thyroid, resulting in preferential synthesis
and secretion of biologically active T3. Therefore, serum T3 is not sensitive for hypothyroidism.
Anemia is often present, usually normocytic-normochromic and of unknown etiology, but it may be
hypochromic because of iron deficiency due to heavy menstrual bleeding and sometimes macrocytic
because of associated pernicious anemia or decreased absorption of folate. Anemia is rarely severe
(hemoglobin is usually > 9 g/dL [> 90 g/L]). As the hypometabolic state is corrected, anemia subsides,
sometimes requiring 6 to 9 months.
Serum cholesterol is usually high in primary hypothyroidism but not as high in secondary
hypothyroidism.
In addition to primary and secondary hypothyroidism, other conditions may cause decreased levels of
total T4, such as euthyroid sick syndrome and serum thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) deficiency.
Screening
Screening for hypothyroidism is warranted in select populations (eg, neonates, older adults with risk
factors) in which it is relatively more prevalent, especially because it can cause significant morbidity and
its manifestations can be subtle. Screening is done by measuring TSH levels.
Treatment of Hypothyroidism
Levothyroxine, adjusted until TSH levels are in midnormal range (1)
Various thyroid hormone preparations are available for replacement therapy, including synthetic
preparations of T4 (levothyroxine), T3 (liothyronine), combinations of the 2 synthetic hormones, and
desiccated porcine thyroid extract. Levothyroxine is preferred; the usual maintenance dose is 75 to 150
mcg orally once a day, depending on age, body mass index, and absorption (for pediatric treatment, see
Hypothyroidism in Infants and Children). In young or middle-aged patients who are otherwise healthy,
the starting dose of levothyroxine can be 100 mcg or 1.7 mcg/kg orally once a day.
In patients with heart disease, therapy is begun with low doses of levothyroxine, usually 25 mcg once a
day. The dose is adjusted every 6 weeks until maintenance dose is achieved. The maintenance dose may
need to be increased in patients who are pregnant. Dose may also need to be increased if medications
that decrease T4 absorption or increase its metabolic clearance are administered concomitantly. The
dose used should be the lowest that restores serum TSH levels to the midnormal range (though this
 5/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
criterion cannot be used in patients with secondary hypothyroidism). In secondary hypothyroidism the
dose of levothyroxine should achieve a free T4 level in the midnormal range.
Liothyronine (L-triiodothyronine) should not be used alone for long-term replacement because of its
short half-life and the large peaks in serum T3 levels it produces. The administration of standard
replacement amounts (25 to 37.5 mcg twice a day) results in rapidly increasing serum T3 to between
300 and 1000 ng/dL (4.62 to 15.4 nmol/L) within 4 hours due to its almost complete absorption; these
levels return to normal by 24 hours. Additionally, patients receiving liothyronine are chemically
hyperthyroid for at least several hours a day, potentially increasing cardiac risks. T3 does not cross the
placenta and should not be administered to patients who are pregnant.
Similar patterns of serum T3 changes occur when mixtures of T3 and T4 are taken orally, although peak
T3 is lower because less T3 is given. Replacement regimens with synthetic T4 preparations reflect a
different pattern in serum T3 response. Increases in serum T3 occur gradually, and normal levels are
maintained when adequate doses of T4 are given. Desiccated animal thyroid preparations contain
variable amounts of T3 and T4 and should not be prescribed unless the patient is already taking the
preparation and has normal serum TSH.
In patients with secondary hypothyroidism, levothyroxine should not be given until there is evidence of
adequate cortisol secretion (or cortisol therapy is given), because levothyroxine could precipitate
adrenal crisis.
Myxedema coma
Myxedema coma is treated as follows:
T4 given IV
Corticosteroids
Supportive care as needed
Conversion to oral T4 when patient is stable
Patients require a large initial dose of T4 (300 to 500 mcg IV) or T3 (25 to 50 mcg IV). The intravenous
maintenance dose of T4 is 75 to 100 mcg once a day and of T3, 10 to 20 mcg twice a day until T4 can be
given orally. Corticosteroids are also given because the possibility of central hypothyroidism usually
cannot be initially ruled out. The patient should not be rewarmed rapidly, which may precipitate
hypotension or arrhythmias.
Hypoxemia is common, so the partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2) should be monitored.
If ventilation is compromised, immediate mechanical ventilatory assistance is required. The
precipitating factor should be rapidly and appropriately treated and fluid replacement given carefully,
because hypothyroid patients do not excrete water appropriately. Finally, all medications should be
given cautiously because they are metabolized more slowly than in healthy people.
Treatment reference
 6/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Jonklaas J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al: Guidelines for the Treatment of Hypothyroidism: Prepared
by the American Thyroid Association Task Force on Thyroid Hormone Replacement. Thyroid 24(12):
1670–1751, 2014. doi: 10.1089/thy.2014.0028
Geriatrics Essentials: Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is particularly common among older adults. It occurs in close to 10% of women and 6%
of men > 65 years. Although typically easy to diagnose in younger adults, hypothyroidism may be subtle
and manifest atypically in older adults.
Older patients have significantly fewer symptoms than do younger patients, and symptoms and signs
are often subtle and vague. Many older patients with hypothyroidism present with nonspecific geriatric
syndromes—confusion, anorexia, weight loss, falling, incontinence, and decreased mobility.
Musculoskeletal symptoms (especially arthralgias) occur often, but arthritis is rare. Muscular aches and
weakness, often mimicking polymyalgia rheumatica or polymyositis, and an elevated creatine kinase
(CK) level may occur. In older patients, hypothyroidism may mimic dementia or parkinsonism.
In older patients, levothyroxine therapy is begun with low doses, usually 25 mcg once a day.
Maintenance doses may also need to be lower in older patients.
Key Points
Hypothyroidism is deficiency of thyroid hormone.
The most common etiology of hypothyroidism is primary thyroid disease, often due to
Hashimoto thyroiditis, but sometimes caused by some treatments (thyroid surgery,
radioactive iodine therapy, radiation therapy to the neck, or some medications).
Secondary hypothyroidism is caused by hypothalamic or pituitary disease.
Signs and symptoms of primary hypothyroidism are often mild and nonspecific and can
include fatigue, cold intolerance, constipation, fluid retention, periorbital edema, and/or
impaired mental clarity.
Subclinical hypothyroidism (minimal or no symptoms and an elevated serum level of
thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]) and normal free thyroxine [T4]) is common.
Diagnose primary or secondary hypothyroidism by testing serum TSH and T4. In primary
hypothyroidism, TSH is elevated and T4 is low; in secondary hypothyroidism, both TSH
and T4 are low.
Myxedema coma (coma, hypothermia, and other organ dysfunction) is a rare life-
threatening condition that can occur during acute illness in patients with
hypothyroidism; it requires rapid diagnosis and treatment.
Treat with levothyroxine and adjust dose until TSH levels are normal.
 7/8

 Hypothyroidism - Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Check cortisol levels in patients with secondary hypothyroidism before starting thyroid
replacement therapy, because of the serious risk of adrenal crisis.
Screen selected patients (neonates, older adults with risk factors) with a serum TSH.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 8/8
