Infective Endocarditis
Infective endocarditis is infection of the endocardium, usually with bacteria
(commonly, streptococci or staphylococci) or fungi. It may cause fever, heart
murmurs, petechiae, anemia, embolic phenomena, and endocardial
vegetations. Vegetations may result in valvular incompetence or obstruction,
myocardial abscess, or mycotic aneurysm. Diagnosis requires demonstration of
microorganisms in blood and usually echocardiography. Treatment consists of
prolonged antimicrobial treatment and sometimes surgery.
Endocarditis usually refers to infection of the endocardium (ie, infective endocarditis). The term can also
include noninfective endocarditis, in which sterile platelet and fibrin thrombi form on cardiac valves and
adjacent endocardium. Noninfective endocarditis sometimes leads to infective endocarditis. Both can
result in embolization and impaired cardiac function.
The diagnosis of infective endocarditis is usually based on a constellation of clinical findings rather than
a single definitive test result.
Infective endocarditis can occur at any age. Male individuals are affected about twice as often as female
individuals (1). Incidence of infection and mortality increase with increasing age. Patients who use illicit
intravenous drugs, patients who are immunocompromised, and patients with prosthetic heart valves
and other intracardiac devices are at highest risk. There is also an increased risk in patients with
indwelling intravascular catheters.
The normal heart is relatively resistant to infection. Bacteria and fungi do not easily adhere to the
endocardial surface, and constant blood flow helps prevent them from settling on endocardial
structures. Thus, 2 factors are typically required for endocarditis:
A predisposing abnormality of the endocardium
Microorganisms in the bloodstream (eg, bacteremia)
Massive bacteremia or particularly virulent microorganisms (eg, Staphylococcus aureus) cause
endocarditis on normal valves.
Endocardial factors
Endocarditis usually involves the heart valves. Major predisposing factors are congenital heart defects,
rheumatic valvular disease, bicuspid aortic valves, calcific aortic valves, mitral valve prolapse,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and prior endocarditis. Prosthetic valves and other intracardiac devices
are a particular risk. Occasionally, mural thrombi, ventricular septal defects, and patent ductus
arteriosus sites become infected. The nidus for infection is usually a sterile fibrin-platelet vegetation
formed when damaged endothelial cells release tissue factor.
Infective endocarditis occurs most often on the left side (eg, mitral or aortic valve). Approximately 5 to
10% of cases are right-sided (tricuspid or pulmonic valve) (1). Patients who use intravenous drugs have a
much higher incidence of right-sided endocarditis.
Microorganisms
Microorganisms that infect the endocardium may originate from distant infected sites (eg, cutaneous
abscess, inflamed or infected gums, urinary tract infection) or have obvious portals of entry such as a
central venous catheter or a drug injection site. Almost any implanted foreign material (eg, ventricular
or peritoneal shunt, prosthetic device) is at risk of bacterial colonization, thus becoming a source of
 2/26
 
bacteremia and hence endocarditis. Endocarditis also may result from asymptomatic bacteremia, such
as typically occurs during invasive dental, medical, or surgical procedures. Even toothbrushing and
chewing can cause bacteremia (usually due to viridans streptococci) in patients with gingivitis.
Causative microorganisms vary by site of infection, source of bacteremia, and host risk factors (eg,
intravenous drug use), but overall, 80 to 90% of cases are caused by
Streptococci, or
Staphylococcus aureus
Most of the rest of endocarditis cases are caused by
Enterococci
Gram-negative bacilli
HACEK organisms (Haemophilus species, Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae)
Fungi
However, the incidence of staphylococcal and enterococcal endocarditis has been increasing, and
streptococcal endocarditis has been decreasing.
The disease develops in 3 stages:
Bacteremia: Microorganisms are present in the blood
Adhesion: The microorganism adheres to abnormal or damaged endothelium via surface
adhesions
Colonization: Proliferation of the organism together with inflammation, leading to a mature
vegetation
Many of the causative microorganisms produce polysaccharide biofilms that shield them from host
immune defences and impede antibiotic penetration.
Etiology reference
1. Delgado V, Ajmone Marsan N, de Waha S, et al: 2023 ESC Guidelines for the management of
endocarditis [published correction appears in Eur Heart J 2023 Sep 20] [published correction
appears in Eur Heart J 2024 Jan 1;45(1):56]. Eur Heart J 44(39):3948–4042, 2023.
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehad193
Pathophysiology of Infective Endocarditis
Endocarditis has local and systemic consequences.
Local consequences
Local consequences of infective endocarditis include
 3/26
 
Myocardial abscesses with tissue destruction and sometimes conduction system
abnormalities (usually with low septal abscesses)
Sudden, severe valvular regurgitation, causing heart failure and death (usually due to
lesions of the mitral valve or the aortic valve)
Aortitis due to contiguous spread of infection
Prosthetic valve infections are particularly likely to involve valve ring abscesses, obstructing vegetations,
myocardial abscesses, and mycotic aneurysms manifested by valve obstruction, dehiscence, and
conduction disturbances.
Systemic consequences
Systemic consequences of endocarditis are primarily due to
Embolization of infected material from the heart valve
Immune-mediated phenomena (primarily in chronic infection)
Right-sided lesions typically produce septic pulmonary emboli, which may result in pulmonary
infarction, pneumonia, or empyema. Left-sided lesions may embolize to any tissue, particularly the
kidneys, spleen, and central nervous system. Mycotic aneurysms can form in any major artery.
Cutaneous and retinal emboli are common. Diffuse glomerulonephritis may result from immune
complex deposition.
Classification of Infective Endocarditis
Infective endocarditis may have an indolent, subacute course or a more acute, fulminant course with
greater potential for rapid decompensation.
Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), although aggressive, usually develops insidiously and
progresses slowly (ie, over weeks to months). Often, no source of infection or portal of entry is evident.
SBE is caused most commonly by streptococci (especially viridans, microaerophilic, anaerobic, and
nonenterococcal group D streptococci and enterococci) and less commonly by S. aureus, Staphylococcus
epidermidis, Gemella morbillorum, Abiotrophia defectiva (formerly, Streptococcus defectivus), Granulicatella
species, and fastidious Haemophilus species. SBE often develops on abnormal valves after asymptomatic
bacteremia due to periodontal, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary infections.
Acute bacterial endocarditis (ABE) usually develops abruptly and progresses rapidly (ie, over days). A
source of infection or portal of entry is often evident. When bacteria are virulent or bacterial exposure is
massive, ABE can affect normal valves. It is usually caused by S. aureus, group A hemolytic streptococci,
pneumococci, or gonococci.
Prosthetic valvular endocarditis (PVE) develops in 1 to 2% of patients within 1 year after valve
replacement and in 0.5%/year thereafter (1). It is more common after aortic than after mitral valve
replacement and affects mechanical and bioprosthetic valves equally. Early-onset infections (< 2 months
after surgery) are caused mainly by contamination during surgery with antimicrobial-resistant bacteria
(eg, S. epidermidis, diphtheroids, coliform bacilli) or by fungi (eg, Candida species, Aspergillus species).
 4/26
 
Late-onset infections are caused mainly by contamination with low-virulence organisms during surgery
or by transient asymptomatic bacteremias, most often with streptococci; S. epidermidis; diphtheroids;
and the fastidious gram-negative bacilli, Haemophilus species, Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, and
Cardiobacterium hominis.
Symptoms and Signs of Infective Endocarditis
Symptoms and signs vary based on the classification but are nonspecific.
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Initially, symptoms of subacute bacterial endocarditis are vague: low-grade fever (< 39° C), night sweats,
fatigability, malaise, and weight loss. Chills and arthralgias may occur. Symptoms and signs of valvular
insufficiency may be a first clue. Initially, ≤ 15% of patients have fever or a murmur, but eventually
almost all develop both. Physical examination may be normal or include pallor, fever, change in a
preexisting murmur or development of a new regurgitant murmur, and tachycardia.
Retinal emboli can cause round or oval hemorrhagic retinal lesions with small white centers (Roth
spots).
Cutaneous manifestations include petechiae (on the upper trunk, conjunctivae, mucous membranes,
and distal extremities), painful erythematous subcutaneous nodules on or near the tips of digits (Osler
nodes), nontender hemorrhagic macules or papules on the palms or soles (Janeway lesions), and
splinter hemorrhages under the nails.
About 35% of patients have central nervous system (CNS) effects, including transient ischemic attacks,
stroke, toxic encephalopathy (due to infective microemboli), and, if a mycotic CNS aneurysm ruptures,
brain abscess and subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Renal emboli may cause flank pain and, rarely, gross hematuria.
Splenic emboli may cause left upper quadrant pain.
Prolonged infection may cause splenomegaly or clubbing of fingers and toes.
Cutaneous Manifestations of Infective Endocarditis
 5/26
 
Infective Endocarditis (Osler Nodes)
This patient with infective endocarditis has multiple Osler nodes (tender, erythematous nodules on the
toes).
Infective Endocarditis (Janeway Lesions)
This patient with infective endocarditis has multiple Janeway lesions (nontender, erythematous papules) on
the palms. The patient also has some Osler nodes (tender, erythematous nodules on the fingers).
Infective Endocarditis (Osler Node and Janeway Lesions)
The image on the left shows an Osler node (tender and erythematous nodule) on the thumb. The image on
the right shows Janeway lesions (nontender and erythematous macules on the palm).
Splinter Hemorrhage
Splinter hemorrhages are small linear hemorrhages under the fingernails.
Image courtesy of CDC/Dr. Thomas F. Sellers via the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public
Health Image Library.
Conjunctival Hemorrhage in Infective Endocarditis
Infective Endocarditis (Conjunctival Petechiae)
This photo shows conjunctival petechiae in a patient with infective endocarditis.
Infective Endocarditis (Conjunctival Hemorrhages)
This photo shows conjunctival hemorrhages in a patient with infective endocarditis.
 7/26

Infective Endocarditis (Roth Spot)
The image on the left shows multiple Roth spots or retinal hemorrhages. The image on the right shows a
close up of a Roth spot with central clearing.
Acute bacterial endocarditis and prosthetic valvular endocarditis
Symptoms and signs of acute bacterial endocarditis and prosthetic valvular endocarditis are similar to
those of subacute bacterial endocarditis, but the course is more rapid. Fever (78%), cardiac murmur
(65%), and congestive heart failure (27%) are the most frequent symptoms at presentation (1). Rarely,
purulent meningitis occurs.
Right-sided endocarditis
Septic pulmonary emboli may cause cough, pleuritic chest pain, and sometimes hemoptysis. A murmur
of tricuspid regurgitation is typical.
Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis
Blood cultures or serologic testing
Echocardiography and sometimes other imaging modalities
Clinical criteria
Because symptoms and signs are nonspecific, vary greatly, and may develop insidiously, diagnosis
requires a high index of suspicion. Endocarditis should be suspected in patients with fever and no
obvious source of infection, particularly if a heart murmur is present. Suspicion of endocarditis should
be very high if blood cultures are positive in patients who have a history of a heart valve disorder, who
 8/26
 
have had certain recent invasive procedures, or who inject drugs. Patients with documented bacteremia
should be examined thoroughly and repeatedly for new valvular murmurs and signs of emboli.
Other than positive blood cultures, there are no specific laboratory findings. Established infections often
cause a normocytic-normochromic anemia, elevated white blood cell count, increased erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, increased immunoglobulin levels, and the presence of circulating immune
complexes and rheumatoid factor, but these findings are not diagnostically helpful. Urinalysis often
shows microscopic hematuria and, occasionally, red blood cell casts, pyuria, or bacteriuria.
Identification of organisms
Identification of the organism and its antimicrobial susceptibility is vital to guide treatment.
If endocarditis is suspected, at least 2 (ideally 3) sets of blood cultures should be obtained under strict
aseptic technique, with one aerobic and one anaerobic culture in each set. Samples should contain 8
to10 mL of blood per bottle and, ideally, are obtained > 6 hours apart (if presentation suggests acute
bacterial endocarditis, 2 culture samples are obtained within the first 1 to 2 hours). Each set of cultures
should be obtained from a separate, fresh venipuncture site (ie, not from preexisting vascular
catheters). Blood cultures do not need to be restricted to times during chills or fever because most
patients have continuous bacteremia. When endocarditis is present and no prior antibiotic therapy was
given, at least one culture is positive in 90% of patients if more than 2 peripheral blood samples were
taken at different times, ideally more than 6 hours apart (1). Premature use of empiric antibiotic therapy
should be avoided in patients with acquired or congenital valvular or shunt lesions to avoid inability to
isolate causative organisms (culture-negative) endocarditis (2). If prior antimicrobial therapy was given,
blood cultures should still be obtained, but results may be negative.
Blood cultures may require 3 to 4 weeks of incubation for certain organisms; however, automated
culture monitoring systems available in most clinical laboratories can identify positive cultures within a
week. Other organisms (eg, Aspergillus) may not produce positive cultures. Some organisms (eg, Coxiella
burnetii, Bartonella species, Chlamydia psittaci, Brucella species) require serodiagnosis; others (eg,
Legionella pneumophila) require special culture media or polymerase chain reaction (eg, Tropheryma
whippelii). Metagenomic sequencing testing (cell-free DNA testing) may be helpful in selected cases
when no pathogen is detected by culture or PCR testing (2). Negative blood culture results may indicate
suppression due to
Prior antimicrobial therapy
Infection with organisms that do not grow in standard culture media
Another diagnosis (eg, noninfective endocarditis, atrial myxoma with embolic phenomena,
vasculitis)
Imaging studies
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) should be done initially. It has sensitivity of 50 to 90% and
specificity > 90% (3). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) can reveal vegetations too small to be
seen on TTE. It has sensitivity of 90 to 100% (4).
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) should be done when
 9/26
 
Patients have a prosthetic valve (where TTE sensitivity is limited)
Transthoracic echocardiography is nondiagnostic
Diagnosis of infective endocarditis has been established clinically (done to detect
perforations, abscesses, and fistulas)
Serial TEE enables diagnosis of complications that evolve during treatment, such as increasing
vegetation size or abscess formation.
CT is used as needed to fully define paravalvular abscesses and for detection of mycotic aneurysms.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning improves the sensitivity of the modified Duke criteria
(see table Clinical Criteria for Infective Endocarditis According to the 2023 Duke-International Society for
Cardiovascular Infectious Disease) without compromising specificity. It is especially useful for infection
associated with implanted devices, where imaging is hampered by metallic shadowing and
postoperative changes (5, 6). PET scanning also detects extracardiac infection, such as septic emboli,
and is an emerging tool for the diagnosis of endocarditis originating in prosthetic and intracardiac
devices. CT and PET abnormalities are included as major criteria in the Duke criteria and European
guidelines (5).
Routine brain imaging has been proposed because up to approximately 70% of patients have clinically
silent lesions (7). Its utility for prognosis and management is yet to be defined.
Diagnostic criteria
Infective endocarditis is definitively diagnosed when microorganisms are seen histologically in (or
cultured from) endocardial vegetations obtained during cardiac surgery, embolectomy, or autopsy.
Because vegetations are not usually available for examination, there are various clinical criteria for
establishing a diagnosis. These include the latest iteration of the Duke criteria (2023 Duke-International
Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Disease Criteria) (8), which has a sensitivity of 84% and a specificity
of 94% (9) (see tables Definitions of Infective Endocarditis and Clinical Criteria for Infective Endocarditis)
and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2023 modified criteria (5).
TABLE
Definitions of Infective Endocarditis According to the 2023 Duke-
International Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Disease Criteria
Clinical Diagnosis Status Criteria
Definite endocarditis Pathologic criteria:
1. Histopathologic findings of
endocarditis OR
2. Microorganisms identified in patients
with clinical signs of active endocarditis
or
Clinical Diagnosis Status Criteria
Clinical criteria (one of the following):
2 major criteria
1 major and 3 minor criteria
5 minor criteria
One of the following:
Possible endocarditis 1 major and 1 minor criterion
3 minor criteria
One of the following:
Firm alternative diagnosis explaining
the evidence that suggests infective
endocarditis
Lack of recurrence despite < 4 days
of antimicrobial therapy
Rejected endocarditis
No pathologic evidence of infective
endocarditis found during surgery or
autopsy after < 4 days of antibiotic
therapy
Failure to meet the clinical criteria
for possible endocarditis (as listed
above)

International Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Diseases Criteria for Infective
Endocarditis: Updating the Modified Duke Criteria [published correction appears in Clin
Clinical Criteria for Infective Endocarditis According to the 2023
Duke-International Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Disease
Major criteria
Microbiology:
1. Two or more positive separate sets of blood cultures for organisms typical of
endocarditis OR
Three or more positive separate sets of blood cultures for organisms that rarely or
occasionally cause endocarditis
2. PCR or other nucleic acid technique that identifies Coxiella burnetii, Bartonella
species, or Tropheryma whipplei from blood OR
Serologic evidence of Coxiella burnetii (IgG titer > 1:800) or 1 positive blood culture
for Coxiella burnetii OR
Indirect immunofluorescence assays for detection of IgM and IgG antibodies to
Bartonella henselae or Bartonella quintana (IgG titer> 1:800)
Imaging (eg, echocardiographic, CT, [18F]-FDG-PET/CT(A):
1. Echocardiography and/or cardiac CT showing vegetation, valvular/leaflet
perforation/aneurysm, abscess, pseudoaneurysm, or intracardiac fistula OR
Echocardiography showing significant new valvular regurgitation. Worsening or
changing of preexisting regurgitation is not sufficient. OR
New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve (compared with previous imaging)
2. [18F]-FDG-PET/CT imaging with abnormal metabolic activity involving a native
or prosthetic valve (at least 3 months after valve implantation), ascending aortic
graft (with concomitant evidence of valve involvement), intracardiac device
leads, or other prosthetic material
Surgical:
Evidence of infective endocarditis observed on direct inspection during cardiac
surgery.
Minor criteria
Predisposition:
,
Previous history of infective endocarditis,
Prosthetic valve
Previous valve repair
Congenital heart disease
More than mild regurgitation or stenosis of any etiology
Endovascular intracardiac implantable electronic device
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Injection drug use
Fever ≥ 38.0° C (≥ 100.4°F)
Vascular phenomena (confirmed by clinical or imaging evidence):
Arterial embolism
 12/26
 
Septic pulmonary infarction
Abscess of the cerebrum or spleen
Mycotic aneurysm
Intracranial hemorrhage
Conjunctival hemorrhage
Janeway lesions
Purulent purpura
Immunologic phenomena:
Immune complex glomerulonephritis
Osler nodes
Roth spots
Rheumatoid factor
Microbiologic evidence of infection consistent with but not meeting major criteria:
1. Blood culture showing an organism consistent with infective endocarditis OR
2. Positive culture, PCR, or other nucleic acid–based test for an organism consistent
with infective endocarditis from a sterile body site other than cardiac tissue, cardiac
prosthesis, or arterial embolus; or a single finding of a skin bacterium by PCR on a
valve or wire without additional clinical or microbiological supporting evidence
Imaging criteria:
[18F]-FDG-PET/CT imaging with abnormal metabolic activity involving a native or
prosthetic valve (within 3 months after valve implantation), ascending aortic graft
(with concomitant evidence of valve involvement), intracardiac device leads, or
other prosthetic material
Physical examination criteria:
If echocardiography is not available, auscultatory evidence of new valvular
regurgitation. Worsening or changing of preexisting regurgitation is not sufficient.

International Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Diseases Criteria for Infective
Endocarditis: Updating the Modified Duke Criteria [published correction appears in Clin
Infect Dis 2023 Oct 13;77(8):1222]. Clin Infect Dis 77(4):518–526, 2023.
Treatment of Infective Endocarditis
IV antibiotics (based on the organism and its susceptibility)
Sometimes valve debridement, repair, or replacement
Dental evaluation and treatment (to minimize oral sources of bacteremia)
Removal of potential source of bacteremia (eg, internal catheters, devices)
Withholding anticoagulation in patients with cerebral embolism
Treatment consists of a prolonged course of antimicrobial therapy (1). Surgery may be needed for
mechanical complications or resistant organisms. Typically, antimicrobials are given IV. Because they
 14/26
 
must be given for 2 to 8 weeks, home IV therapy is often used.
Any apparent source of bacteremia must be managed: necrotic tissue debrided, abscesses drained, and
foreign material and infected devices removed. Patients with infective endocarditis should be evaluated
by a dentist and treated for oral diseases that could cause bacteremia and subsequent endocarditis.
Existing IV catheters (particularly central venous ones) should be changed. If endocarditis persists in a
patient with a newly inserted central venous catheter, that catheter should also be removed. If
continuous infusions are used instead of intermittent boluses, infusions should not be interrupted for
long periods.
Organisms within biofilms adherent to catheters and other devices may not respond to antimicrobial
therapy, leading to treatment failure or relapse.
Antibiotic regimens
Medications and dosages depend on the microorganism and its antimicrobial susceptibility.
Although most patients are stable enough to wait for culture results, empiric antibiotic therapy before
organism identification may be necessary in seriously ill patients. Antibiotics should not be given until
adequate blood cultures (minimally 2, but ideally 3, samples from different sites over 1 hour) have been
obtained. An empiric regimen should cover typical pathogens (ie, Staphylococci and Streptococci
species), take into account local resistance pattern, such as MRSA prevalence, and include an agent
highly effective at killing (eg, a beta-lactam antibiotic). A typical regimen in the United States may be
vancomycin and ceftriaxone. Certain risk factors for having endocarditis with a less common pathogen
or having a more difficult to eradicate infection include a recently placed prosthetic valve, prolonged
healthcare exposure, and critical illness. Combination therapy is commonly started in these scenarios
and often includes broader spectrum of antibacterial activity and consideration of synergistic agents like
aminoglycosides.
As soon as possible, the empiric antimicrobial regimen should be adjusted based on culture results.
TABLE
Some Antibiotic Regimens for Endocarditis in the United States*
Medication and Dosage
Medication And Dosage
Type for Adults Allergic to
for Adults
Penicillin
Streptococci susceptible to For NVE: Penicillin G 12– Ceftriaxone 2 g IV or IM
penicillin (penicillin G MIC 18 million units a day IV once a day for 4 weeks for
≤ 0.1 mcg/mL) continuously or 2–3 NVE (6 weeks for PVE) or, if
million units every 4 hours gentamicin 3 mg/kg† IV or
for 4 weeks or, if IM once a day is given
gentamicin 3 mg/kg† IV or concurrently, for 2 weeks
 15/26
 
Medication and Dosage
Medication And Dosage
Type for Adults Allergic to
for Adults
Penicillin
IM once a day is given if there is no history of
concurrently, for 2 weeks penicillin anaphylaxis
For PVE: Penicillin G 24 or
million units a day IV
Vancomycin‡ 15 mg/kg IV
continuously or 4 million
every 12 hours for 4 weeks
units every 4 hours for 6
for NVE (6 weeks for PVE)
weeks or, if gentamicin 3
mg/kg† IV or IM (up to 80
mg) is given concurrently,
for 2 weeks
For NVE: Gentamicin 3
mg/kg† IV or IM once a day
for 2 weeks plus penicillin
G 24 million units/ a day IV
continuously or 4 million
units every 4 hours for 4
weeks
Streptococci resistant to Vancomycin‡ 15 mg/kg IV
penicillin (penicillin G MIC every 12 hours for 4 weeks
For PVE: Gentamicin 3
> 0.1 mcg/mL) for NVE (6 weeks for PVE)
mg/kg† IV or IM once a day
for 2 weeks plus penicillin
G 24 million units a day IV
continuously or 4 million
units every 4 hours or
ceftriaxone 2 g once a day
IV or IM for 6 weeks
Enterococci For NVE and PVE: For NVE and PVE:
Ampicillin 2 g IV every 4 Vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV
hours plus ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 hours plus
IV every 12 hours for 6 gentamicin 3 mg/kg IV or
weeks IM once a day or
gentamicin 1 mg/kg IV or
IM every 8 hours for 6
weeks
or
For NVE and PVE: Linezolid
600 mg orally or IV every
12 hours for 6–8 weeks
 16/26
 
Medication and Dosage
Medication And Dosage
Type for Adults Allergic to
for Adults
Penicillin
or
For NVE and PVE:
Daptomycin 10–12 mg/kg
IV once a day for 6–8
weeks
NVE: Cefazolin 2 g IV every
8 hours for 6 weeks if
For NVE: Oxacillin or there is no history of
nafcillin 2 g IV every 4 penicillin anaphylaxis (6–8
hours for 6 weeks weeks for PVE)
For PVE: Oxacillin or or
nafcillin 2 g IV every 4
Staphylococci susceptible Vancomycin‡ 15 mg/kg IV
hours for 6–8 weeks plus
to oxacillin every 12 hours for 4 weeks
gentamicin 1 mg/kg† IV
for NVE (6–8 weeks for
every 8 hours for 2 weeks
PVE)
plus rifampin 300 mg IV or
or
orally every 8 hours for 6–
8 weeks For right-sided NVE:
Daptomycin 6 mg/kg IV
once a day for 6 weeks
For NVE: Vancomycin† 15
mg/kg IV every 12 hours
alone for 6 weeks
For PVE: Vancomycin‡ 15
mg/kg IV every 12 hours
for 6–8 weeks, plus
gentamicin 1 mg/kg IV†
Staphylococci resistant to
every 8 hours for 2 weeks
—
oxacillin
plus rifampin 300 mg
orally every 8 hours for 6–
8 weeks for PVE
or
For right-sided NVE:
Daptomycin 6 mg/kg IV
once a day for 6 weeks
 17/26
 
Medication and Dosage
Medication And Dosage
Type for Adults Allergic to
for Adults
Penicillin
Ceftriaxone 2 g once/day
IV or IM for 4 weeks for
NVE (6 weeks for PVE)
or
Ampicillin 2 g IV every 4 Ceftriaxone 2 g IV once a
hours for 4 weeks for NVE day for 4 weeks for NVE (6
HACEK microorganisms§ (6 weeks for PVE) weeks for PVE) if there is
no history of penicillin
or
anaphylaxis
Ciprofloxacin 1000 mg
orally once a day or 400
mg IV every 12 hours for 4
weeks for NVE (6 weeks
for PVE)
Sensitivity-proven beta-
lactam antimicrobial (eg,
ceftriaxone 2 g IV every
12–24 hours or
Noncoliform bacilli ceftazidime 2 g IV every 8 —
hours) plus an
aminoglycoside (eg,
gentamicin 2 mg/kg† IV
every 8 hours) for 6 weeks
 18/26
 
* Antimicrobial sensitivity changes over time, and there are site-specific differences in
antimicrobial susceptibility. Advice from a consultant familiar with these patterns is
imperative.
† Based on ideal rather than actual weight in patients with obesity.
‡ With vancomycin, serum levels must be monitored if doses > 2 g/24 hours are
administered.
§ HACEK microorganisms: Haemophilus parainfluenzae, H. aphrophilus, Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae.
MIC = minimum inhibitory concentration; NVE = native valve endocarditis; PVE = prosthetic
valve endocarditis.
Adapted from Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al: Infective endocarditis in adults:
Diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications; A scientific statement
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation 132 (15):1435–
1486, 2015. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000296
Pearls & Pitfalls
If endocarditis is suspected, withhold antibiotics until adequate blood cultures (minimally
2, or ideally 3, samples from different sites over 1 hour) are obtained.
Native valve right-sided endocarditis can often be treated with 4 weeks of therapy or even as short as 2
weeks for certain typical pathogens (eg,methicillin-sensitive S. aureus) if combination therapy with
gentamicin is used. For left-sided endocarditis, guidelines recommend 6 weeks of parenteral antibiotic
therapy. However, a multicenter, randomized, non-blinded study of uncomplicated left-sided
endocarditis found switching to oral antibiotics (after a minimum of 10 days of parenteral therapy) to be
non-inferior to continued parenteral therapy. In addition, length of hospital stay was shortened in the
patients switched to oral therapy. This approach has the potential to reduce the psychologic stress and
some of the risks inherent to prolonged inpatient parenteral therapy (2). Long-acting lipoglycopeptide
antibiotics, such as dalbavancin, have also been used successfully as part of sequential therapy for
Gram positive endocarditis (3). These options may be particularly useful for patients in whom home
parenteral therapy is not feasible.
Cardiac valve surgery
 19/26
 
Surgery (debridement, valve repair, or valve replacement) is sometimes required for treatment of
infectious endocarditis (4). Surgery is typically indicated in
Patients with heart failure (particularly those with prosthetic, aortic, or native mitral valve
endocarditis and those with pulmonary edema or cardiogenic shock)
Patients with uncontrolled infection (those with persistent infection, infection with fungal or
resistant organisms, recurrent prosthetic valve endocarditis, or endocarditis complicated by
heart block, abscess, aneurysm, fistula, or enlarging vegetation)
Patients at risk for embolism (particularly those with prosthetic, aortic, or native mitral valve
endocarditis, and large vegetations [defined as > 10 mm] or those with recurrent emboli).
Early surgery in these patients decreases the risk of embolic events.
Timing of surgery requires experienced clinical judgment. If heart failure caused by a correctable lesion
is worsening (particularly when the organism is S. aureus, a gram-negative bacillus, or a fungus), surgery
may be required after only 24 to 72 hours of antimicrobial therapy.
Endocarditis involving an implanted cardiac electronic device requires complete removal of the
pacemaker or defibrillator, including all leads and the generator.
Right-sided endocarditis is usually managed medically. If surgery is necessary (due to heart failure or
lack of therapeutic response), then valve repair is preferred over replacement to avoid future prosthetic
valve infection due to any continued IV drug use. Prophylactic placement of an epicardial pacing lead is
recommended at time of tricuspid valve surgery (5). Prophylactic placement avoids any future need for
an endovascular pacing lead to traverse the (native or prosthetic) tricuspid valve and potentially cause
tricuspid regurgitation.
Surgery is usually delayed for a month after intracranial hemorrhage or major ischemic stroke.
Anticoagulation
Patients taking anticoagulants are at increased risk for hemorrhagic stroke and for bleeding resulting
from urgent invasive procedures. Anticoagulation should be withheld in patients with cerebral emboli,
because it increases the risk of hemorrhagic transformation. The decision to withhold anticoagulation in
other patients should be based on the relative risks of hemorrhagic stroke and thromboembolism (6).
Response to treatment
After starting therapy, patients with penicillin-susceptible streptococcal endocarditis usually feel better,
and fever is reduced within 3 to 7 days. Fever may continue for reasons other than persistent infection
(eg, medication allergy, phlebitis, infarction due to emboli). Patients with staphylococcal endocarditis
tend to respond more slowly. Diminution of vegetation size can be followed by serial echocardiography.
Echocardiography should be done at the completion of therapy to establish a new baseline for valvular
appearance (including sterile vegetations) and insufficiency.
Relapse usually occurs within 4 weeks. Antibiotic retreatment may be effective, but surgery may also be
required. In patients without prosthetic valves, recrudescence of endocarditis after 6 weeks usually
results from a new infection rather than a relapse. Even after successful antimicrobial therapy, sterile
 20/26
 
emboli and valve rupture may occur up to 1 year later. Risk of recurrence is significant, so ongoing life-
long dental and cutaneous hygiene is advised. Patients who require antibiotic therapy for any reason
should have at least 3 sets of blood cultures drawn before antibiotics are started.
Prognosis for Infective Endocarditis
Overall, the in-hospital mortality rate for endocarditis is 15 to 20%, with a 1-year mortality rate
approaching 40% (1). Untreated, infective endocarditis is always fatal. Even with treatment, death is
more likely and the prognosis is generally poorer for older patients and patients who have
Infection with resistant organisms
An underlying disorder
A long delay in treatment
Aortic valve or multiple valve involvement
Large vegetations
Polymicrobial bacteremia
Prosthetic valve infections
Mycotic aneurysms
Valve ring abscess
Major embolic events
 21/26
 
Septic shock is more likely in patients with diabetes, acute kidney injury, S. aureus infection, vegetation
size > 15 mm, or signs of persistent infection. The mortality rate for viridans streptococcal endocarditis
without major complications is < 10% (2) but is greater than 90% for Aspergillus endocarditis after
prosthetic valve surgery (3).
The prognosis is better with right-sided than left-sided endocarditis because tricuspid valve dysfunction
is tolerated better, systemic emboli are absent, and right-sided S. aureus endocarditis responds better to
antimicrobial therapy.
Prevention of Infective Endocarditis
Preventive dental examination and therapy before surgery to repair heart valves or congenital heart
lesions is recommended.
Measures to reduce health care–acquired bacteremia aim to curb the rising incidence of iatrogenic
bacteremia and subsequent endocarditis are also recommended (1).
Endocarditis prophylaxis during implantation of prosthetic devices has changed to accommodate the
rise in endocarditis due to enterococci. Prophylaxis often involves the addition of vancomycin or use of
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid instead of a cephalosporin (2).
Dental and cutaneous hygiene is recommended for the general population but particularly for patients
at intermediate risk (those with native valve disease) and high risk.
Patients at high risk
The American Heart Association (AHA) recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients at high risk of
an adverse outcome as a result of infective endocarditis (3). Such patients include those with
Prosthetic heart valves, including transcatheter implanted prostheses
Prosthetic material used for heart valve repair (eg, annuloplasty rings, chords)
Previous infective endocarditis
 22/26
 
Certain congenital heart diseases (CHD): Unrepaired cyanotic CHD (including palliative
shunts and conduits), completely repaired CHD during the first 6 months after surgery if
prosthetic material or device was used, repaired CHD that has residual defects at or
adjacent to the site of repair
Heart transplant recipients with valvulopathy
Procedures requiring antibiotic prophylaxis
Most procedures for which prophylaxis is required for patients at high risk are oral-dental procedures
that manipulate the gingiva or the periapical region of teeth or perforate the oral mucosa (see table
Procedures Requiring Antimicrobial Endocarditis Prophylaxis). Other procedures include
Respiratory tract procedures in which mucosa is incised
Vaginal or cesarean delivery in selected patients at high risk (patients with a prosthetic
cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair and for patients with
unrepaired and palliated cyanotic congenital heart disease)
Gastrointestinal procedures that involve an area with an established infection
Genitourinary procedures that involve an area with an established infection
Musculoskeletal procedures that involve an area with an established infection
Recognition that other non-dental procedures may cause endocarditis may result in expansion of this
list in future guidelines (4, 5).
TABLE
Procedures Requiring Antimicrobial Endocarditis Prophylaxis in
Patients at High Risk for Endocarditis
Type Examples
Dental extraction
Dental implant placement or
reimplantation of avulsed teeth
Periodontal procedures, including
surgery, scaling, root planing, and
Oral-dental*
probing
Prophylactic cleaning of teeth or
implants when bleeding is anticipated
Root canal instrumentation or surgery
beyond the apex
Respiratory tract Bronchoscopy if mucosa is to be incised
Procedures done during an established
infection
 23/26
 
Tonsillectomy, adenoidectomy, or both
None, unless procedure is done during
Gastrointestinal tract
an established infection
None, unless procedure is done during
an established infection (eg, cystoscopy
Genitourinary tract
during known enterococcal urinary tract
infection)
None, unless procedure involves
Musculoskeletal
infected tissue
None, unless procedure involves
Skin
infected tissue
* Examples of oral-dental procedures that do not require prophylaxis are anesthetic
injection through uninfected mucosa and placement of orthodontic brackets.
Data from Wilson W, Taubert KS, Gewitz M, et al: Prevention of infective endocarditis.
Circulation 116 (15):1736–1754, 2007 and Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, et al:
ACC/AHA 2008 Guidelines for the Management of Adults with Congenital Heart Disease: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. Circulation 118(23):e714, 2008.
Prophylactic antibiotic regimens
For most patients and procedures, a single dose shortly before the procedure is effective. For oral-
dental and respiratory procedures, a medication effective against viridans group streptococci is used
(see table Recommended Endocarditis Prophylaxis During Oral-Dental or Respiratory Tract Procedures).
For vaginal delivery, give ampicillin 2 g IV or IM plus gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg (maximum 120 mg) IV
administered within 30 minutes before delivery, followed by ampicillin 1 g IV or IM (or amoxicillin 1 g [as
the trihydrate] orally) 6 hours later.
For gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and musculoskeletal procedures on areas involving infected tissue,
antibiotics should be selected based on the known organism and its sensitivities. If infection is present
but the infecting organism has not been identified, antibiotics for gastrointestinal and genitourinary
prophylaxis should be effective against enterococci (eg, amoxicillin or ampicillin, or vancomycin for
patients who are allergic to penicillin).
Antibiotics for skin and musculoskeletal prophylaxis should be effective against staphylococci and beta-
hemolytic streptococci (eg, a cephalosporin or vancomycin or clindamycin if infection with methicillin-
resistant staphylococci is possible).
Guidelines for endocarditis prophylaxis vary geographically.
 24/26
 
Additional information regarding prophylactic regimens is provided by guidelines from the American
Heart Association and the European Society of Cardiology (3, 4).
Key Points
Because the normal heart is relatively resistant to infection, endocarditis occurs mainly
when there is a predisposing abnormality of the endocardium.
Predisposing cardiac abnormalities include congenital heart defects, rheumatic valvular
disease, bicuspid or calcific aortic valves, mitral valve prolapse, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, prior endocarditis, and intracardiac devices.
Local cardiac consequences include myocardial abscess, conduction system
abnormalities, and sudden, severe valvular regurgitation.
Systemic consequences include immune phenomena (eg, glomerulonephritis) and septic
emboli, which may affect any organ put particularly the lungs (with right sided
endocarditis), kidneys, spleen, central nervous system, skin, and retina (with left-sided
endocarditis).
Obtain blood cultures and diagnose using modified Duke or European Society of
Cardiology clinical criteria.
Treat with a prolonged course of antimicrobial therapy; surgery may be needed for
mechanical complications or resistant organisms.
Give antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients at high risk of an adverse outcome from
infective endocarditis, including those with prosthetic heart valves or heart valve repair,
 25/26
 
previous infective endocarditis, certain congenital heart diseases, or who are heart
transplant recipients with valvulopathy.