=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:55.981134",
  "file_size_bytes": 437146,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Lymphedema
By James D. Douketis, MD, McMaster University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Apr 2024
Lymphedema is edema of a limb due to lymphatic hypoplasia (primary) or to
obstruction or disruption (secondary) of lymphatic vessels. Symptoms and
signs, when chronic, are brawny, fibrous, nonpitting edema in one or more
limbs. Diagnosis is by physical examination. Treatment consists of exercise,
pressure gradient dressings, massage, and sometimes surgery. Cure is unusual,
but treatment may lessen symptoms, slow progression, and prevent
complications. Patients are at risk of cellulitis, lymphangitis, and, rarely,
lymphangiosarcoma.
(See also Overview of the Lymphatic System.)
Etiology of Lymphedema
Lymphedema may be
Primary: Due to lymphatic hypoplasia
Secondary: Due to obstruction or disruption of lymphatic vessels
Primary lymphedemas
Primary lymphedemas are inherited and account for a small proportion of cases of lymphedema. They
vary in phenotype and patient age at presentation but mostly involve the lower extremities (1).
Congenital lymphedema appears before age 2 years and is due to lymphatic aplasia or hypoplasia.
Milroy disease is an autosomal dominant familial form of congenital lymphedema attributed to
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3) gene mutations and sometimes associated with
cholestatic jaundice and edema or diarrhea due to a protein-losing enteropathy caused by intestinal
lymphangiectasia (2).
Lymphedema praecox appears between ages 2 and 35 years, typically in females at the onset of
menses or pregnancy.
 1/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Meige disease is an autosomal dominant familial form of lymphedema praecox attributed to mutations
in a transcription factor gene (FOXC2) that causes extra eyelashes (distichiasis), cleft palate, and edema
of legs, arms, and sometimes the face (3).
Lymphedema tarda occurs after age 35 years. Familial and sporadic forms exist; the genetic basis of
both is unknown. Clinical findings are similar to those of lymphedema praecox but may be less severe.
Lymphedema is prominent in some other genetic syndromes, including
Turner syndrome
Yellow nail syndrome, characterized by pleural effusions and yellow nails
Hennekam syndrome, a rare congenital syndrome of intestinal and other
lymphangiectases, facial anomalies, and intellectual disability
Secondary lymphedema
Secondary lymphedema accounts for > 95% of cases.
Most common causes are
Surgery (especially lymph node dissection, typically for treatment of breast cancer)
Radiation therapy (especially axillary or inguinal)
Trauma
Lymphatic obstruction by a tumor
Lymphatic filariasis (present in some tropical and subtropical areas)
Mild lymphedema may also result from leakage of lymph into interstitial tissues in patients with chronic
venous insufficiency.
Etiology references
1. Schook CC, Mulliken JB, Fishman SJ, Grant FD, Zurakowski D, Greene AK. Primary lymphedema:
clinical features and management in 138 pediatric patients. Plast Reconstr Surg 2011;127(6):2419-
2431. doi:10.1097/PRS.0b013e318213a218
2. Van Zanten M, Mansour S, Ostergaard P, et al. Milroy Disease. 2006 Apr 27 [Updated 2021 Feb
18]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, et al., editors. GeneReviews® [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2024. Available from:

3. Wheeler ES, Chan V, Wassman R, Rimoin DL, Lesavoy MA. Familial lymphedema praecox: Meige's
disease. Plast Reconstr Surg 1981;67(3):362-364. doi:10.1097/00006534-198103000-00016
Symptoms and Signs of Lymphedema
Symptoms of lymphedema include aching discomfort and a sensation of heaviness or fullness.
The cardinal sign is soft-tissue edema, graded in 3 stages:
 2/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Stage 1: The edema is pitting, and the affected area often returns to normal by morning.
Stage 2: The edema is nonpitting, and chronic soft-tissue inflammation causes early fibrosis.
Stage 3: The edema is brawny and irreversible, largely because of soft-tissue fibrosis.
The swelling is most often unilateral and may worsen when the weather is warm, before menstruation
occurs, and after the limb remains for a long time in a dependent position. It can affect any part of the
limb (isolated proximal or distal) or the entire extremity; it can restrict range of motion when swelling is
periarticular. Disability and emotional distress can be significant, especially when lymphedema results
from medical or surgical treatment.
Lymphedema
IMAGE
SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Skin changes are common and include hyperkeratosis, hyperpigmentation, verrucae, papillomas, and
fungal infections.
 3/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Lymphatic Filariasis (Range of Severity of Lymphedema)
IMAGE
© SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA
Rarely, an affected limb becomes extremely large, and the hyperkeratosis is severe, giving the
appearance of elephant skin (elephantiasis). This manifestation is more common with filariasis than
with other causes of lymphedema.
Complications
Lymphangitis may develop, most often when bacteria enter through skin cracks between the toes as a
result of fungal infections or through cuts to the hand. Lymphangitis is usually streptococcal, causing
erysipelas; sometimes it is staphylococcal. The affected limb becomes erythematous (possibly only dark
on patients with dark skin) and feels hot; erythematous streaks may extend proximally from the point of
entry, and lymphadenopathy may develop. Infrequently, the skin breaks down, which may lead to local
infection or cellulitis.
Rarely, long-standing lymphedema leads to lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves syndrome), usually in
patients who have had a mastectomy (1) and in patients with filariasis (2).
Symptoms and signs references
1. Taşdemir A, Karaman H, Ünal D, Mutlu H. Stewart-Treves Syndrome after Bilateral Mastectomy
and Radiotherapy for Breast Carcinoma: Case Report. J Breast Health 2015;11(2):92-94. Published
2015 Apr 1. doi:10.5152/tjbh.2015.1604
2. Kamat A, Chinder PS, Hindiskere S, Gopurathingal AA. Angiosarcoma in Chronic Filarial
Lymphedema - A Report of Two Cases. J Orthop Case Rep 2022;12(8):110-114.
doi:10.13107/jocr.2022.v12.i08.2988
Diagnosis of Lymphedema
 4/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Clinical diagnosis
CT or MRI if cause is not apparent
Primary lymphedema is usually obvious based on characteristic soft-tissue edema throughout the body
and other information from the history and physical examination.
Diagnosis of secondary lymphedema is usually obvious from physical examination. Additional tests are
indicated when secondary lymphedema is suspected unless the diagnosis and cause are obvious. CT
and MRI can identify sites of lymphatic obstruction; radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy can identify
lymphatic hypoplasia or sluggish flow.
Progression can be monitored by measuring limb circumference, measuring water volume displaced by
the submerged limb, or using skin or soft-tissue tonometry (to measure resistance to compression);
these tests have not been validated.
Tests for lymphatic filariasis should be done in tropical and subtropical areas where the infecting
microfilariae are present.
If lymphedema seems much greater than expected (eg, on the basis of lymph node dissection) or
appears after a delay in a female treated for breast cancer, cancer recurrence should be considered.
Treatment of Lymphedema
Sometimes surgical soft-tissue reduction and reconstruction for primary lymphedema
Mobilizing fluid (eg, by elevation and compression, massage, pressure bandages,
intermittent pneumatic compression)
Treatment of primary lymphedema may include surgical soft-tissue reduction (removal of subcutaneous
fat and fibrous tissue) and reconstruction if quality of life is significantly reduced.
Treatment of secondary lymphedema involves managing its cause.
For lymphedema itself, several interventions to mobilize fluid (complex decongestive therapy) can be
used. They include
Manual lymphatic drainage, in which the limb is elevated and compressed (“milked”) toward
the heart
Gradient pressure bandages or sleeves
Limb exercises
Limb massage, including intermittent pneumatic compression
Surgical soft-tissue reduction, lymphatic reanastomoses, and formation of drainage channels are
sometimes tried but have not been rigorously studied (1).
Preventive measures include avoiding application of heat, vigorous exercise, being sedentary for long
periods, and constrictive garments (including blood pressure cuffs) around the affected limb. Skin and
 5/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
nail care require meticulous attention; vaccination, phlebotomy, and IV catheterization in the affected
limb should be avoided.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Avoid vaccination, phlebotomy, and IV catheterization in limbs affected by lymphedema.
Cellulitis and lymphangitis are treated with beta-lactamase–resistant antibiotics that are effective
against gram-positive organisms (eg, dicloxacillin).
Treatment reference
1. Executive Committee of the International Society of Lymphology. The diagnosis and treatment
of peripheral lymphedema: 2020 Consensus Document of the International Society of
Lymphology. Lymphology. 2020;53(1):3-19.
Prognosis for Lymphedema
Cure is unusual once lymphedema occurs. Meticulous treatment and possibly preventive measures can
lessen symptoms, slow or halt disease progression, and prevent complications.
Key Points
Secondary lymphedema (due to obstruction or disruption of lymphatic vessels) is far
more common than primary lymphedema (which is due to lymphatic hypoplasia).
Elephantiasis (extreme hyperkeratosis of skin in a limb affected by lymphedema) is a
severe manifestation of lymphedema usually due to lymphatic filariasis.
Cure of lymphedema is unusual, but treatment can decrease symptoms, slow or halt
disease progression, and prevent complications.
More Information
The following English-language resources may be useful. Please note that THE MANUAL is not
responsible for the content of these resources.
National Lymphedema Network. Position papers intended to standardize clinical education and
practice
McLaughlin SA, Staley AC, Vicini F, et al. Considerations for Clinicians in the Diagnosis, Prevention,
and Treatment of Breast Cancer-Related Lymphedema: Recommendations from a
 6/7

 Lymphedema - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Multidisciplinary Expert ASBrS Panel : Part 1: Definitions, Assessments, Education, and Future
Directions. Ann Surg Oncol 2017;24(10):2818-2826. doi:10.1245/s10434-017-5982-4
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 7/7
