=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:47.664743",
  "file_size_bytes": 722122,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
By Mustafa A. Mafraji, MD, Rush University Medical Center
Reviewed By William E. Brant, MD, University of Virginia
Reviewed/Revised Sept 2025
T1-Weighted MRI
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF HAKAN ILASLAN, MD.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 1/7
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MRI of the Knee
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF HAKAN ILASLAN, MD.
Short T1 Inversion Recovery MRI of the Whole Body
IMAGE
IMAGE COURTESY OF HAKAN ILASLAN, MD.
MRI uses magnetic fields and radio waves to produce images of thin slices of tissues (tomographic
images). Normally, protons within tissues spin to produce tiny magnetic fields that are randomly
aligned. When surrounded by the strong magnetic field of an MRI device, the magnetic axes align along
that field. A radiofrequency pulse is then applied, causing the axes of many protons to momentarily
align against the field in a high-energy state. After the pulse, protons relax and resume their baseline
alignment within the magnetic field of the MRI device. The magnitude and rate of energy release that
occurs as the protons resume this alignment (T1 relaxation) and as they wobble (precess) during the
process (T2 relaxation) are recorded as spatially localized signal intensities by a coil (antenna) built
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 2/7
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
within the MRI device. Computer algorithms analyze these signals and produce detailed anatomic
images.
The relative signal intensity (brightness) of tissues in an MRI image is determined by factors such as:
The radiofrequency pulse and gradient waveforms used to obtain the image
Intrinsic T1 and T2 characteristics of different tissues
The proton density of different tissues
By controlling the radiofrequency pulse and gradient waveforms, computer programs produce specific
pulse sequences that determine how an image is obtained (weighted) and how various tissues appear.
Images can be:
T1-weighted
T2-weighted
Proton density–weighted
For example, fat appears bright (high signal intensity) on T1-weighted images and relatively dark (low
signal intensity) on T2-weighted images; water and fluids appear relatively dark on T1-weighted images
and bright on T2-weighted images. T1-weighted images optimally show normal soft-tissue anatomy and
fat (eg, to confirm a fat-containing mass). T2-weighted images optimally show fluid and abnormalities
(eg, tumors, inflammation, trauma). In practice, T1- and T2-weighted images provide complementary
information, so both are important for characterizing abnormalities.
High-resolution MRI scanners increase image quality and diagnostic accuracy and produce a wide
variety of additional pulse sequences to further characterize tissues and tumors.
Uses of MRI
MRI is preferred to CT when soft-tissue contrast resolution must be highly detailed (eg, to evaluate
intracranial or spinal cord abnormalities, inflammation, trauma, suspected musculoskeletal tumors, or
internal joint derangement). MRI is also useful for the following:
Vascular imaging: Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is used to image arteries with
good diagnostic accuracy and is less invasive than conventional angiography. A gadolinium
contrast agent is sometimes used. MRA can be used to image the thoracic and abdominal
aorta and arteries of the brain, neck, abdominal organs, kidneys, and lower extremities.
Venous imaging (magnetic resonance venography, or MRV) provides the best images of
venous abnormalities, including thrombosis and anomalies.
Hepatic and biliary tract abnormalities: Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) is a noninvasive, highly accurate method of imaging the biliary and pancreatic duct
systems.
Masses in the female reproductive organs: MRI supplements ultrasound to further
characterize adnexal masses and to stage uterine tumors.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 3/7
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Certain fractures: As one example, MRI can provide accurate images of hip fractures in
patients with osteopenia.
Bone marrow infiltration and bone metastases: MRI is particularly useful for evaluating
patients with positive bone scintigraphy and normal radiographs as well as for
characterizing bone marrow abnormalities as metastases versus nonmalignant lesions.
MRI can be substituted for CT with contrast in patients with a high risk of reactions to iodinated contrast
agents.
Contrast agents
Contrast agents are often used with MRI to highlight vascular structures and to help characterize
inflammation and tumors.
The most commonly used agents are gadolinium derivatives, which have magnetic properties that affect
proton relaxation times. MRI of intra-articular structures may include injection of a diluted gadolinium
derivative into a joint.
Variations of MRI
Diffusion (diffusion-weighted) MRI
Signal intensities are related to diffusion of water molecules in tissue. This type of MRI can be used:
To detect early cerebral ischemia and infarction
To detect white matter disease of the brain
To differentiate abscess from a cystic tumor
To stage various tumors such as non–small cell lung cancer
Echo planar imaging
This ultrafast technique (images obtained in < 1 second) is used for diffusion, perfusion, and functional
imaging of the brain and heart. Its potential advantages include showing brain and heart activity and
reducing motion artifacts. However, its use is limited because it requires special technical hardware and
is more sensitive to various artifacts than conventional MRI.
Functional MRI
Functional MRI is used to assess brain activity by location.
Most commonly, the brain is scanned at low resolution very frequently (eg, every 2 to 3 seconds). The
change in oxygenated hemoglobin can be discerned and used to estimate metabolic activity of different
parts of the brain.
In clinical settings, functional MRI is especially helpful clinically in the mapping of motor or language
cortices (ie, cortical areas that, when removed, result in deficits in sensory processing, motor function,
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 4/7
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
or language processing) in patients with intracranial abnormalities such as tumors and arteriovenous
malformations for whom surgery is being planned. It is also used to plan epilepsy surgery.
Researchers may use functional MRI to correlate brain function and anatomy (called brain mapping).
MRI is performed while subjects do different cognitive tasks (eg, solve a math equation); the
metabolically active parts of the brain are presumed to be the structures most involved in that
particular task.
Gradient echo imaging
Gradient echo is a pulse sequence that can be used for fast imaging of moving blood and cerebrospinal
fluid (eg, in MRA). Because this technique is fast, it can reduce motion artifacts (eg, blurring) during
imaging that requires patients to hold their breath (eg, during imaging of cardiac, pulmonary, and
abdominal structures).
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
MRS combines the information obtained by MRI (mainly based on water and fat content of tissues) with
that of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). NMR provides information about tissue metabolites and
biochemical abnormalities; this information can help differentiate certain types of tumors and other
abnormalities.
Magnetic resonance enterography
Magnetic resonance enterography is often used for follow-up imaging of children with known
inflammatory conditions of the small bowel.
Because magnetic resonance enterography does not require ionizing radiation, it has an advantage over
CT enterography.
Perfusion MRI
Perfusion MRI is a method of assessing relative cerebral blood flow. It can be used to detect:
Areas of ischemia during imaging for stroke
Areas of increased vascularity that can indicate tumors
This information can help direct biopsy.
Positron emission tomography (PET)–MRI
PET-MRI combines functional PET with whole-body MRI. T1-weighted and short T1 inversion recovery
(STIR) sequences are frequently used. This modality (available since 2010) is generally available only in
major academic medical centers.
Disadvantages of MRI
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 5/7
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MRI is relatively expensive, requires longer imaging times than CT, and may not be immediately
available in all areas.
Other disadvantages include problems related to:
The magnetic field
Patient claustrophobia
Contrast reactions
Magnetic field
MRI is relatively contraindicated in patients with implanted materials that can be affected by powerful
magnetic fields. These materials include:
Ferromagnetic metal (ie, containing iron)
Magnetically activated or electronically controlled medical devices (eg, pacemakers,
implantable cardioverter defibrillators, cochlear implants)
Nonferromagnetic electrical wires or materials (eg, some pacemaker wires, certain
pulmonary artery catheters)
Ferromagnetic material may be displaced by the strong magnetic field, injuring a nearby organ; for
example, displacement of vascular clips can result in hemorrhage. Displacement is more likely if the
material has been in place < 6 weeks (before scar tissue forms). Ferromagnetic material can also cause
imaging artifacts.
Magnetically activated medical devices may malfunction when exposed to magnetic fields.
Magnetic fields may induce current in any conductive materials strong enough to produce enough heat
to burn tissues.
Whether a specific device is compatible with MRI depends on the type of device, its components, and its
manufacturer (see MRIsafety.com). Patients with an implantable device should not be placed in the MRI
magnetic field until examiners are sure that MRI is safe with such a device in place. Also, MRI machines
with different magnetic field strengths have different effects on materials, so safety in one machine
does not ensure safety in another.
The MRI magnetic field is very strong and may always be on. Thus, a ferromagnetic object (eg, an oxygen
tank, a metal pole) at the entrance of the scanning room may be pulled into the magnet bore at high
velocity and injure anyone in its path. The only way to separate the object from the magnet may be to
turn off (quench) the magnetic field.
Claustrophobia
The imaging tube of an MRI machine is a tight, enclosed space that can trigger claustrophobia even in
patients without preexisting phobias or anxiety. Also, some patients with obesity do not fit on the table
or within the machine. Premedication with an antianxiety medication (eg, alprazolam or lorazepam) 15
to 30 minutes before scanning is effective for most anxious patients.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 6/7
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:53 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Special Subjects - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MRI scanners with an open side can be used for patients with claustrophobia (or those with severe
obesity). Images obtained during open MRI may be inferior to those of enclosed scanners depending on
the field strength of the magnet, but they are usually sufficient for making a diagnosis.
Patients should be warned that the MRI machine makes loud, banging noises during scanning.
Contrast reactions
Gadolinium-based contrast agents injected IV can cause headache, nausea, pain, and distortion of taste,
as well as sensation of cold at the injection site.
Serious contrast reactions are rare and much less common than with iodinated contrast agents.
However, nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been reported in a small number of patients with
advanced chronic kidney disease. NSF is a rare but life-threatening disorder that involves fibrosis of the
skin, blood vessels, and internal organs, resulting in severe disability or death (1).
Gadolinium-based contrast agents are categorized into Group I and Group II, based on their risk of NSF.
Most NSF cases are linked to group I agents, which are not advised for use in the United States and
Europe (2).
The likelihood of developing NSF or nephrotoxicity is extremely low in patients who received group II
gadolinium-based contrast media, even in high-risk patients. The consensus statement from the
American College of Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation indicates that kidney function
screening is not mandatory for any patients receiving group II gadolinium-based contrast media (3).
Gadolinium-based contrast agents should be used only when necessary and at the lowest possible
dose.
References
1. Lange S, Mędrzycka-Dąbrowska W, Zorena K, et al. Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis as a
Complication after Gadolinium-Containing Contrast Agents: A Rapid Review. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. 2021;18(6):3000. doi:10.3390/ijerph18063000
2. Starekova J, Pirasteh A, Reeder SB. Update on Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agent Safety, From
the AJR Special Series on Contrast Media. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2024;223(3):e2330036.
doi:10.2214/AJR.23.30036
3. Weinreb JC, Rodby RA, Yee J, et al. Use of Intravenous Gadolinium-based Contrast Media in
Patients with Kidney Disease: Consensus Statements from the American College of Radiology and
the National Kidney Foundation. Radiology. 2021;298(1):28-35. doi:10.1148/radiol.2020202903
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/special-subjects/principles-of-radiologic-imaging/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri 7/7
