=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:27.536812",
  "file_size_bytes": 465447,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes
By Ranya N. Sweis, MD, MS, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine;
Arif Jivan, MD, PhD, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2024 | Modified Apr 2025
Treatment of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) is designed to relieve distress, interrupt thrombosis,
reverse ischemia, limit infarct size, reduce cardiac workload, and prevent and treat complications. An
ACS is a medical emergency; outcome is greatly influenced by rapid diagnosis and treatment. Treatment
occurs simultaneously with diagnosis. Treatment includes revascularization (with percutaneous
coronary intervention, coronary artery bypass grafting, or fibrinolytic therapy) and pharmacologic
therapy to treat ACS and underlying coronary artery disease.
Medications used depend on the type of ACS and include
Aspirin, clopidogrel, or both (prasugrel or ticagrelor are alternatives to clopidogrel if
fibrinolytic therapy has not been given)
Beta-blocker
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor for certain patients undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) and high-risk lesions (eg, high thrombus burden, no reflow)
A heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin) or bivalirudin (particularly in
patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction [STEMI] who are at high risk of
bleeding)
IV nitroglycerin (unless low-risk, uncomplicated myocardial infarction)
Fibrinolytics for select patients with STEMI when timely PCI unavailable
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (as early as possible)
Statins
Antiplatelet and antithrombotic drugs, which stop clots from forming, are used routinely. Anti-ischemic
drugs (eg, beta-blockers, IV nitroglycerin) are frequently added, particularly when chest pain or
hypertension is present (see table Medications for Coronary Artery Disease).
Fibrinolyticsshould be used if not contraindicated for STEMI if primary PCI is not immediately available but
worsen outcome for unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
Chest pain can be treated with nitroglycerin or sometimes morphine. Nitroglycerin is preferable to
morphine, which should be used judiciously (eg, if a patient has a contraindication to nitroglycerin or is
in pain despite nitroglycerin therapy). Nitroglycerin is initially given sublingually, followed by continuous
IV drip if needed. Morphine 2 to 4 mg IV, repeated every 15 minutes as needed, is highly effective but
 1/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
can depress respiration, can reduce myocardial contractility, and is a potent venous vasodilator.
Evidence also suggests that morphine interferes with some P2Y12 receptor inhibitors. A large
retrospective trial showed that morphine may increase mortality in patients with acute myocardial
infarction (1, 2). Hypotension and bradycardia secondary to morphine can usually be overcome by
prompt elevation of the lower extremities.
Blood pressure (BP) is normal or slightly elevated in most patients on arrival at the emergency
department; BP gradually falls over the next several hours. Continued hypertension requires treatment
with antihypertensives, preferably IV nitroglycerin, to lower BP and reduce cardiac workload. Severe
hypotension or other signs of shock are ominous and must be treated aggressively with IV fluids and
sometimes vasopressors.
TABLE
Medications for Coronary Artery Disease*
Medication Dosage Use
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Benazepril
All patients with CAD,
Captopril
especially those with large
Enalapril
infarctions, renal
Fosinopril insufficiency, heart failure,
hypertension, or diabetes
Lisinopril
Variable†
Contraindications include
Moexipril
hypotension,
Perindopril hyperkalemia, bilateral
renal artery stenosis,
Quinapril
pregnancy, and known
Ramipril
allergy
Trandolapril
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
Candesartan Variable† An effective alternative for
patients who cannot
Eprosartan
tolerate ACE inhibitors (eg,
Irbesartan because of cough);
currently, not first-line
Losartan
treatment after MI
Olmesartan
Contraindications include
Telmisartan
hypotension,
Valsartan hyperkalemia, bilateral
 2/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
renal artery stenosis,
pregnancy, and known
allergy
Anticoagulants: Direct-acting oral anticoagulants‡
Apixaban 5 mg orally twice a day
150 mg orally twice a day
(or 110–150 mg orally
Dabigatran twice a day for patients
also taking P2Y12
May be useful long-term in
inhibitors)
patients with non-valvular
atrial fibrillation
Edoxaban 60 mg orally once a day
20 mg orally once a day (or
15 mg orally once a day
Rivaroxaban
for patients also taking
P2Y12 inhibitors)
Anticoagulants: Direct thrombin inhibitors
As an alternative to
350 mcg/kg (IV bolus)
heparin in patients with
followed by 25
Argatroban
ACS and a known or
mcg/kg/minute (IV
suspected history of
infusion)
heparin-induced
Bivalirudin Variable† thrombocytopenia
Anticoagulants: Factor Xa inhibitor
As an alternative to
heparin in patients with
2.5 mg subcutaneously ACS and a known or
Fondaparinux
every 24 hours suspected history of
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia
Anticoagulants: Low molecular weight heparins
Dalteparin Variable† Patients with unstable
angina or NSTEMI
Enoxaparin¶
Patients < 75 years
Tinzaparin
receiving tenecteplase
 3/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
Almost all patients with
STEMI as an alternative to
unfractionated heparin
(unless PCI is indicated
and can be done in < 90
minutes); drug continued
until PCI or CABG is done
or patient is discharged
Anticoagulants: Unfractionated heparin
Patients with unstable
angina or NSTEMI: 60–70
units/kg IV (maximum,
5000 units; bolus),
followed by 12–15
units/kg/hour (maximum,
Patients with unstable
1000 units/hour) for 48
angina or NSTEMI as an
hours or until PCI is
alternative to enoxaparin
complete
Patients who have STEMI
Unfractionated heparin
Patients with STEMI: 60
and undergo urgent
units/kg IV (maximum,
angiography and PCI or
4000 units; bolus) given
patients > 75 years
when alteplase, reteplase,
receiving tenecteplase
or tenecteplase is started,
then followed by 12
units/kg/hour (maximum,
1000 units/hour) for 48
hours or until PCI is
complete
Anticoagulants: Vitamin K inhibitor
Warfarin Oral dose adjusted to Recommended for
maintain INR of 2–3 primary prevention in
patients at high risk of
systemic emboli (ie, with
atrial fibrillation,
mechanical heart valves,
venous
thromboembolism,
hypercoagulable
disorders, or LV thrombus)
 4/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
May be useful for primary
prevention in patients with
STEMI and anterior wall
akinesis or dyskinesis if
risk of bleeding is low
Reasonable for patients
with asymptomatic mural
thrombus
Antiplatelet agents
For stable angina†: 75 or
81 mg orally once a day
(enteric-coated)
All patients with CAD
For ACS: 160–325 mg
unless aspirin is not
orally chewed (not enteric-
Aspirin tolerated or is
coated) on arrival at
contraindicated; used
emergency department
long-term
and once a day thereafter
during hospitalization and
81 mg§ orally once a day
long-term after discharge
Used with aspirin or, in
patients who cannot
tolerate aspirin, alone
For elective PCI,
maintenance therapy
75 mg orally once a day
required for at least 1
For patients undergoing
month for bare-metal
PCI: 300–600 mg orally
Clopidogrel stents and for at least 6–
once, then 75 mg orally
12 months for drug-eluting
once a day for 1–12
stents
months
For ACS, dual antiplatelet
therapy (typically with
aspirin) is recommended
for at least 12 months (for
any type of stent)
Prasugrel 60 mg orally once before Only for patients with ACS
PCI, followed by 10 mg undergoing PCI
 5/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
orally once a day for 1–12
Not used in combination
months
with fibrinolytic therapy
For patients undergoing
PCI: 180 mg orally once
before the procedure,
Ticagrelor —
followed by 90 mg orally
twice a day for 1–12
months
Rarely used routinely
because neutropenia is a
250 mg orally twice a day
Ticlopidine risk and white blood cell
for 1–12 months
count must be monitored
regularly
Beta-blockers
All patients with ACS,
unless a beta-blocker is
Atenolol Variable†
not tolerated or is
contraindicated, especially
high-risk patients; used
long-term
Bisoprolol Variable† Intravenous beta-blockers
may be used in patients
with ongoing chest pain
despite usual measures, or
persistent tachycardia, or
Carvedilol Variable†
hypertension in patients
with unstable angina and
myocardial infarction.
Caution is necessary in
patients with hypotension
Metoprolol Variable†
or other evidence of
hemodynamic instability.
Calcium channel blockers
Amlodipine Variable† Patients with stable angina
if symptoms persist
Diltiazem (extended-
Variable† despite nitrates use or if
release)
nitrates are not tolerated
Felodipine Variable†
 6/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
Nifedipine (extended-
Variable†
release)
Verapamil (extended-
Variable†
release)
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
Some patients with ACS,
Abciximab Variable† particularly those who are
having PCI with stent
placement and high-risk
patients with unstable
Eptifibatide Variable†
angina or NSTEMI and
large thrombus burden
Therapy started during PCI
Tirofiban Variable† and continued for 6–24
hours thereafter
Nitrates: Short acting
All patients for immediate
Sublingual nitroglycerin 0.3–0.6 mg every 4–5
relief of chest pain; used
(tablet or spray) minutes up to 3 doses
as needed
Selected patients with ACS:
During the first 24 to 48
hours, those with heart
failure (unless
hypotension is present),
large anterior myocardial
Started at 5 mcg/minute
infarction, persistent
Nitroglycerin as and increased 2.5–5.0 mcg
angina, or hypertension
continuous IV drip every few minutes until
(BP is reduced by 10–20
required response occurs
mm Hg but not to < 80–90
mm Hg systolic)
For longer use, patients
with recurrent angina or
persistent pulmonary
congestion
Nitrates: Long acting
 7/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
10–20 mg orally 3 times a
Isosorbide dinitrate day; can be increased to
40 mg 3 times a day
40–80 mg orally twice a
Isosorbide dinitrate
day (typically given at 8 AM
(sustained-release)
and 2 PM)
Patients who have
20 mg orally twice a day, unstable angina or
Isosorbide mononitrate with 7 hours between 1st persistent severe angina
and 2nd doses and continue to have
anginal symptoms after
30 or 60 mg orally once a
Isosorbide mononitrate the beta-blocker dose is
day, increased to 120 mg
(sustained-release) maximized
or, rarely, 240 mg
A nitrate-free period of
0.2–0.8 mg/hour applied
about 8–10 hours (typically
between 6:00 and 9:00 AM
Nitroglycerin patches at night) recommended to
and removed 12–14 hours
avoid tolerance (specific
later to avoid tolerance
drugs recommend
1.25 cm spread evenly different durations of
over upper torso or arms nitrate-free period)
every 6 to 8 hours and
Nitroglycerin ointment 2%
covered with plastic,
preparation (15 mg/2.5
increased to 7.5 cm as
cm)
tolerated, and removed
for 8–12 hours each day to
avoid tolerance
Opioids
Morphine should be used
judiciously (eg, if
nitroglycerin is
contraindicated or if
patient has symptoms
2–4 mg IV, repeated as
Morphine despite maximal doses of
needed
nitroglycerin) given a
possible increase in
mortality as well as
attenuation of P2Y12
receptor inhibitor activity
PCSK-9 inhibitors
 8/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
For patients not at target
LDL-C levels, used alone or
in combination with other
Initial dose: 75 mg
lipid-lowering therapies
subcutaneously, once
(eg, statins, ezetimibe) for
Alirocumab every 2 weeks or 300 mg
the treatment of adults
subcutaneously once
with primary
every 4 weeks
hyperlipidemia (including
familial
hypercholesterolemia)
For patients not at target
LDL-C levels, used alone or
Initial dose for primary in combination with other
hyperlipidemia: 140 mg lipid-lowering therapies
subcutaneously every 2 (eg, statins, ezetimibe) for
Evolocumab
weeks or 420 mg the treatment of adults
subcutaneously once with primary
monthly hyperlipidemia (including
familial
hypercholesterolemia)
Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors)
Atorvastatin
Fluvastatin
Patients with CAD should
Lovastatin
Variable† (see
be given maximally
Dyslipidemia)
Pravastatin
tolerated statin dose
Rosuvastatin
Simvastatin
Other medications
Ivabradine 5 mg orally twice a day, Inhibits sinus node
increased to 7.5 mg orally
For symptomatic
twice a day if needed
treatment of chronic
stable angina pectoris in
patients with normal sinus
rhythm who cannot take
beta-blockers
 9/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Medication Dosage Use
In combination with beta-
blockers in patients
inadequately controlled by
beta-blocker alone and
whose heart rate > 60
beats/minute
500 mg orally twice a day, Patients in whom anginal
increased to 1000 mg symptoms continue
Ranolazine
orally twice a day as despite treatment with
needed other antianginal drugs
* Clinicians may use different combinations of medications depending on the type of
coronary artery disease that is present.
† Refer to the manufacturer's prescribing information or a drug information database for
specific dosing information.
‡ Lower doses of Direct-acting oral anticoagulants are sometimes used, based on patient-
specific risk factors.
§ Higher doses of aspirin do not provide greater protection and increase risk of adverse
effects.
¶ Of low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs), enoxaparin is preferred.
ACS = acute coronary syndromes; BP = blood pressure; CABG = coronary artery bypass
grafting; CAD = coronary artery disease; HMG = hydroxymethylglutaryl; INR = international
normalized ratio; LDL-C = low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LV = left ventricular; MI =
myocardial infarction; NSTEMI = non–ST-segment elevation MI; PCI = percutaneous
intervention; STEMI = ST-segment elevation MI.
References
1. Meine TJ, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al: Association of intravenous morphine use and outcomes in
acute coronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE Quality Improvement Initiative. Am Heart J
149(6):1043-1049, 2005. doi 10.1016/j.ahj.2005.02.010
2. Kubica J, Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al: Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure
and action in patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-
 10/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
controlled IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J 37(3):245–252, 2016. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv547
Antiplatelet Agents
Aspirin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor, ticlopidine, and glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors are
examples of antiplatelet agents. All patients are given aspirin 160 to 325 mg (not enteric-coated), if not
contraindicated (eg, life-threatening active bleeding), at presentation and 81 mg once a day indefinitely
thereafter. Chewing the first dose before swallowing quickens absorption. Aspirin reduces short- and
long-term mortality risk (1).
If aspirin cannot be taken, clopidogrel 75 mg orally once a day or ticlopidine 250 mg orally twice a day
may be used. Clopidogrel has largely replaced ticlopidine for routine use because neutropenia is a risk
with ticlopidine, and the white blood cell count must be monitored regularly if patients are taking
ticlopidine.
Patients not undergoing revascularization
Patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in whom intervention is not possible or recommended are
given both aspirin and clopidogrel (or ticagrelor) for at least 12 months. In general, the concern with
dosage and duration of antiplatelet agents is to balance the decreased risk of coronary thrombosis with
the increased risk of bleeding.
Patients undergoing revascularization
In patients undergoing PCI, a loading dose of clopidogrel (300 to 600 mg orally once), prasugrel (60 mg
orally once), or ticagrelor (180 mg orally once) improves outcomes (1).
Some clinicians give a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor during PCI to all high-risk patients (eg, those with markedly
elevated cardiac biomarkers, a TIMI risk score ≥ 4, or persistent symptoms despite adequate
pharmacologic therapy) with large thrombus burden. The GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is continued for 6 to 24
hours, and angiography is done before the infusion period is over. GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are not
recommended for patients receiving fibrinolytics. Abciximab, tirofiban, and eptifibatide appear to have
equivalent efficacy, and the choice of agent should depend on other factors (eg, cost, availability,
familiarity).
For patients receiving a stent for revascularization, aspirin is continued indefinitely. Clopidogrel 75 mg
orally once a day, prasugrel 10 mg orally once a day, or ticagrelor 90 mg orally twice a day should be
used for at least 1 month in patients with a bare-metal stent. Patients with a drug-eluting stent after ACS
have a prolonged risk of thrombosis and benefit from up to 12 months of clopidogrel (or prasugrel or
ticagrelor) treatment.
Antiplatelet agent reference
1. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al: 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am
Coll Cardiol 79(2):e21–e129, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2021.09.006
 11/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Anticoagulant Agents
Either a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), unfractionated heparin, or bivalirudin is given routinely
to patients with acute coronary syndrome unless contraindicated (eg, by active bleeding or planned use
of streptokinase or anistreplase). Choice of agent depends on whether revascularization is anticipated,
as well as other factors such as patient characteristics, cost, and local practice.
Patients at high risk of systemic emboli (eg, atrial fibrillation with CHA2DS2VASc score ≥ 2) also require
long-term therapy with an oral anticoagulant (eg, warfarin, dabigatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban).
Conversion to oral anticoagulants should begin 48 hours after symptom resolution or PCI.
Unfractionated heparin
Unfractionated heparin is more complicated to use because it requires frequent (every 6 hours) dosing
adjustments to achieve an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 1.5 to 2 times the control value.
In patients undergoing angiography, further dosing adjustment is done to achieve an activated clotting
time (ACT) of 200 to 250 seconds if the patient is treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and 250 to 300
seconds if a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is not being given. However, if bleeding develops after catheterization,
the effects of unfractionated heparin are shorter and can be reversed (by promptly stopping the
heparin infusion and giving protamine sulfate).
Low molecular weight heparin
The LMWHs have better bioavailability, are given by simple weight-based dosing without monitoring
aPTT and dose titration, and have lower risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. They also may
produce an incremental benefit in outcomes relative to unfractionated heparin in patients with ACS. Of
the LMWHs, enoxaparin appears to be superior to dalteparin or nadroparin. However, enoxaparin may
pose a higher bleeding risk in patients with STEMI who are > 75 years, and its effects are not completely
reversible with protamine.
Choice of heparin
Thus, taking all into account, many published guidelines recommend LMWH (eg, enoxaparin) over
unfractionated heparin in patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI and in patients < age 75 years with
STEMI who are not undergoing PCI.
By contrast, unfractionated heparin is recommended when emergency PCI is done (eg, patients with
acute STEMI who proceed to the catheterization laboratory), when CABG is indicated within the next 24
hours, and when patients are at high risk of bleeding complications (eg, history of gastrointestinal
bleeding within the last 6 months) or have creatinine clearance < 30 mL/minute (0.5 mL/second).
For patients undergoing PCI, post-procedure heparin is no longer recommended unless patients are at
high risk of thromboembolic events (eg, patients with large anterior MI, known LV thrombus, atrial
fibrillation), because postprocedure ischemic events have decreased with the use of stents and
antiplatelet agents. For patients not undergoing PCI, heparin is continued for 48 hours (or longer if
symptoms persist).
 12/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Heparin alternatives
The difficulties with the heparins (including bleeding complications, the possibility of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, and, with unfractionated heparin, the need for dosing adjustments) have led to the
search for alternative anticoagulants.
The direct thrombin inhibitors, bivalirudin and argatroban, may have a lower incidence of serious
bleeding and improved outcomes, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency (hirudin, another
direct thrombin inhibitor, appears to cause more bleeding than the other agents). Bivalirudin is an
acceptable alternative to unfractionated heparin for patients undergoing PCI who are at high risk of
bleeding. The factor Xa inhibitor fondaparinux reduces mortality and reinfarction in patients with
NSTEMI who undergo PCI without increasing bleeding but has no clear benefit compared with
unfractionated heparin in patients with STEMI (1). Although routine use of these alternative
anticoagulants is thus not currently recommended, they should be used in place of unfractionated
heparin or LMWH in patients with a known or suspected history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
For patients who require anticoagulation for another reason (eg, atrial fibrillation), direct-acting oral
anticoagulants (apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, rivaroxaban) are preferred long term over warfarin,
unless there is a contraindication to them. For most patients requiring anticoagulation, triple therapy
with oral anticoagulation, a P2Y12 inhibitor, and aspirin is continued up to 1 week to 1 month after
intervention, and then patients are continued on oral anticoagulation and a P2Y12 inhibitor for 6
months to 1 year. Calcium channel blockers and nitrates may also be given to reduce risk of coronary
spasm.
Anticoagulants reference
1. Yusuf S, Mehta SR, Chrolavicius S, et al. Effects of fondaparinux on mortality and reinfarction in
patients with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: the OASIS-6 randomized
trial. JAMA 2006;295(13):1519-1530. doi:10.1001/jama.295.13.joc60038
Beta-Blockers
Beta-blockers are recommended unless contraindicated (eg, by bradycardia, heart block, hypotension,
or asthma), especially for high-risk patients. Beta-blockers reduce heart rate, arterial pressure, and
contractility, thereby reducing cardiac workload and oxygen demand. Infarct size largely determines
cardiac performance after recovery. Oral beta-blockers given within the first few hours improve
prognosis by reducing infarct size, recurrence rate, incidence of ventricular fibrillation, and mortality risk
(1).
Heart rate and BP must be carefully monitored during treatment with beta-blockers. Dosage is reduced
if bradycardia or hypotension develops. Excessive adverse effects may be reversed by infusion of the
beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol 1 to 5 mcg/minute.
Beta-blocker reference
 13/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Chen ZM, Pan HC, Chen YP, et al. Early intravenous then oral metoprolol in 45,852 patients with
acute myocardial infarction: randomised placebo controlled trial. Lancet 366:1622–1632, 2005.
Nitrates
A short-acting nitrate, nitroglycerin, is used to reduce cardiac workload in selected patients.
Nitroglycerin dilates veins, arteries, and arterioles, reducing left ventricular preload and afterload. As a
result, myocardial oxygen demand is reduced, lessening ischemia.
IV nitroglycerin is recommended during the first 24 to 48 hours for patients with heart failure, large
anterior myocardial infarction, persistent chest discomfort, or hypertension. BP should not be reduced
to < 110 to 120 mm Hg systolic; patients who remain symptomatic at that BP should have emergency
PCI rather than further BP reduction.
Longer use may benefit patients with recurrent chest pain or persistent pulmonary congestion. In high-
risk patients, nitroglycerin given in the first few hours reduces infarct size and short-term and possibly
long-term mortality risk. Nitroglycerin is not routinely given to low-risk patients with uncomplicated
myocardial infarction.
Fibrinolytics
Tenecteplase (TNK), alteplase (rTPA), reteplase (rPA), streptokinase, and anistreplase (anisoylated
plasminogen activator complex—APSAC), all given IV, are plasminogen activators. They convert single-
chain plasminogen to double-chain plasminogen, which has fibrinolytic activity. They have different
characteristics and dosing regimens (see table IV Fibrinolytic Therapies) and are appropriate only for
selected patients with STEMI).
Tenecteplase and reteplase are recommended most often because of their simplicity of administration;
tenecteplase is given as a single bolus over 5 seconds and reteplase as a double bolus 30 minutes apart.
Administration time and medication errors are reduced compared with other fibrinolytics. Tenecteplase,
like alteplase, has an intermediate risk of intracranial hemorrhage and has a higher rate of
recanalization than other fibrinolytics. Reteplase has the highest risk of intracranial hemorrhage and a
recanalization rate similar to that of tenecteplase, and it is expensive.
Streptokinase (not available in the United States) may induce allergic reactions, especially if it has been
used previously, and must be given by infusion over 30 to 60 minutes; however, it has a low incidence of
intracerebral hemorrhage and is relatively inexpensive. Anistreplase, related to streptokinase, is
similarly allergenic and slightly more expensive but can be given as a single bolus. Neither drug requires
concomitant heparin use. For both, recanalization rate is lower than that with other plasminogen
activators. Because of the possibility of allergic reactions, patients who previously received
streptokinase or anistreplase are not given that drug again.
Alteplase is given in an accelerated or front-loaded dosage over 90 minutes. Alteplase with concomitant
IV heparin improves patency, is nonallergenic, and has a higher recanalization rate than other
 14/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
fibrinolytics.
TABLE
IV Fibrinolytic Therapies
Circulating half- Concurrent Allergic
Medication
life (minutes) heparin reactions
Anistreplase 100 No Yes
Alteplase 6 Yes Rare
Reteplase 13–16 Yes Rare
Streptokinase (not
available in the 20 No Yes
United States)
Initial half-life of
20–24 minutes;
Tenecteplase terminal phase Yes Rare
half-life of 90–130
minutes
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Intracranial Bleeding Risk from Thrombolytic Therapy of MI
Contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy
There are many absolute and relative contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy. In general, the presence
of active bleeding or a condition where bleeding would be life-threatening is an absolute
contraindication. The contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy are listed in the table Contraindications to
Fibrinolytic Therapy.
TABLE
Contraindications to Fibrinolytic Therapy
Absolute contraindications Aortic dissection
Previous hemorrhagic stroke (at any
time)
Previous ischemic stroke within 1 year
Active internal bleeding (not menses)
 15/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Intracranial tumor
Pericarditis
Blood pressure > 180/110 mm Hg after
initial antihypertensive therapy
Trauma or major surgery within 4 weeks
Active peptic ulcer
Relative contraindications
Pregnancy
Bleeding diathesis
Noncompressible vascular puncture
Current anticoagulation (INR > 2)
Other Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors reduce mortality risk in patients with myocardial
infarction, especially in those with anterior infarction, heart failure, or tachycardia. The greatest benefit
occurs in the highest-risk patients early during convalescence. ACE inhibitors are given > 24 hours after
thrombolysis stabilization and, because of continued beneficial effect, may be prescribed long-term.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) may be an effective alternative for patients who cannot
tolerate ACE inhibitors (eg, because of cough). They are not first-line treatment after myocardial
infarction. Contraindications include hypotension, kidney failure, bilateral renal artery stenosis, and
known allergy.
Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors) have long been used for prevention of coronary artery disease
and acute coronary syndromes, but there is now increasing evidence that they also have short-term
benefits, such as stabilizing plaque, reversing endothelial dysfunction, decreasing thrombogenicity, and
reducing inflammation. Thus, all patients without contraindications (eg, statin-induced myopathy, liver
dysfunction) to therapy should receive a statin at the maximally tolerated dose as early as possible
following ACS regardless of their serum lipid levels (1).
PCSK-9 inhibitors (evolocumab, alirocumab) are used for patients not at target low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels. They are used alone or in combination with other lipid-lowering therapies (eg, statins,
ezetimibe) for the treatment of adults with primary hyperlipidemia (including familial
hypercholesterolemia).
In patients who have had an MI, icosapent ethyl is also used to reduce lipid levels (2).
Other medications references
 16/17

 Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Wang WT, Hellkamp A, Doll JA, et al. Lipid Testing and Statin Dosing After Acute Myocardial
Infarction. J Am Heart Assoc 2018;7(3):e006460. Published 2018 Jan 25.
doi:10.1161/JAHA.117.006460
2. Gaba P, Bhatt DL, Steg PG, et al. Prevention of Cardiovascular Events and Mortality With
Icosapent Ethyl in Patients With Prior Myocardial Infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;79(17):1660-
1671. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2022.02.035
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 17/17
