=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:06.312007",
  "file_size_bytes": 490968,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Mitral Regurgitation
(Mitral Insufficiency)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Mitral regurgitation (MR) is incomplete closure of the mitral valve causing
backflow from the left ventricle (LV) into the left atrium during systole. MR can
be primary (common causes are mitral valve prolapse and rheumatic fever) or
secondary to LV dilation or infarction. Complications include progressive heart
failure, arrhythmias, and endocarditis. Symptoms and signs include
palpitations, dyspnea, and a holosystolic apical murmur. Diagnosis is by
physical examination and echocardiography. Prognosis depends on LV function
and etiology, severity, and duration of MR. Patients with mild, asymptomatic
MR may be monitored, but progressive or symptomatic MR requires mitral
valve repair or replacement.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Etiology of Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation, also called mitral insufficiency, may be:
Acute or chronic
Primary (organic) or secondary (functional)
Causes of acute mitral regurgitation include the following:
Ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction or rupture
Infective endocarditis with rupture of the chordae tendineae
Acute rheumatic fever
Myxomatous rupture of the chordae tendineae
Acute dilation of the left ventricle due to myocarditis or myocardial ischemia
Mechanical failure of a prosthetic mitral valve
Common causes of chronic mitral regurgitation are intrinsic valve pathology including mitral valve
prolapse (primary MR) or distortion of a normal valve by dilatation and impairment of the left ventricle
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 1/11
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
and/or the mitral annulus (secondary MR).
Primary (organic) MR pathology is most often mitral valve prolapse or rheumatic heart disease. Less
common causes are connective tissue disorders, congenital cleft mitral valve, and radiation-induced
heart disease.
Secondary (functional) MR occurs when disease of the left ventricle or left atrium (LA) impairs valve
function. Ventricular impairment and dilation displace the papillary muscles outward, which tether the
otherwise normal leaflets and cause non-coaptation. The causes are myocardial infarction (ischemic
chronic secondary MR) or intrinsic myocardial disease (nonischemic chronic secondary MR). One
mechanism of secondary mitral regurgitation is atrial functional mitral regurgitation, caused by annular
dilatation due to chronic atrial fibrillation with an enlarged left atrium. In the presence of
cardiomyopathy, any degree of secondary MR worsens prognosis.
In infants and children, causes of MR include LV dysfunction/dilation as in endocardial fibroelastosis or
acute myocarditis, a cleft mitral valve with or without an endocardial cushion defect, papillary muscle
dysfunction secondary to anomalous left coronary artery arising from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA),
and myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve.
MR may coexist with mitral stenosis when thickened valvular leaflets do not close normally (see table
Typical Echocardiographic Findings in Different Types of Mitral Regurgitation).
TABLE
Typical Echocardiographic Findings in Different Types of Mitral
Regurgitation
Mitral
Type of Mitral Mitral Leaflet Left Ventricular
Regurgitation
Regurgitation Motion Function
Jet Direction
Increased
(myxomatous
Primary (intrinsic
leaflets)
Eccentric Initially normal
valve pathology)
Decreased
(rheumatic)
Decreased
Secondary (non-
ischemic or global Central Globally reduced
Symmetrically
ischemic changes)
tented
Decreased
Secondary (regional Regionally reduced
ischemic changes Eccentric (focal scar due to
Asymmetrically
focal) coronary occlusion)
tented
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 2/11
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Mitral
Type of Mitral Mitral Leaflet Left Ventricular
Regurgitation
Regurgitation Motion Function
Jet Direction
Secondary (atrial
functional due to Central Normal Initially normal
atrial fibrillation)
Pathophysiology of Mitral Regurgitation
Acute mitral regurgitation may cause acute pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock or sudden cardiac
death.
Complications of chronic MR include gradual enlargement of the LA; LV enlargement and eccentric
hypertrophy, which initially compensates for regurgitant flow (preserving forward stroke volume) but
eventually decompensates (reducing forward stroke volume); atrial fibrillation, which may be further
complicated by thromboembolism; and infective endocarditis.
Symptoms and Signs of Mitral Regurgitation
Acute mitral regurgitation causes the same symptoms and signs as acute heart failure (dyspnea,
fatigue, weakness, edema) and cardiogenic shock (hypotension with resultant multisystem organ
damage). Specific signs of mitral regurgitation may be absent.
Chronic mitral regurgitation is initially asymptomatic. Symptoms develop insidiously as the LA
enlarges, pulmonary artery pressure and venous pressure increase, and LV compensation fails.
Symptoms include dyspnea, fatigue (due to heart failure), orthopnea, and palpitations (often due to
atrial fibrillation). Rarely, patients present with endocarditis (eg, with fever, weight loss, embolic
phenomena).
Signs develop only when mitral regurgitation becomes moderate or severe (see table Grading of Mitral
Regurgitation). Inspection and palpation may detect a brisk apical impulse and sustained left
parasternal movement due to systolic expansion of an enlarged LA. An LV impulse that is sustained,
enlarged, and displaced downward and to the left suggests LV hypertrophy and dilation. A diffuse
precordial lift occurs with severe MR because the LA enlarges, causing anterior cardiac displacement,
and secondary pulmonary hypertension causes right ventricular hypertrophy. A regurgitant murmur (or
thrill) may also be palpable in severe cases.
AUDIO
Mitral Regurgitation Murmur
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 3/11
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
AUDIO
Mitral Regurgitation Murmur With Third Heart Sound (S3)
On auscultation, the cardinal sign of mitral regurgitation is a holosystolic (pansystolic) murmur, heard
best at the apex with the diaphragm of the stethoscope when the patient is in the left lateral decubitus
position. In mild MR, the systolic murmur may be abbreviated or occur late in systole. The first heart
sound (S1) may be soft (or occasionally loud). A third heart sound (S3 gallop) at the apex reflects a
dilated LV and severe MR.
The murmur begins with S1 in conditions causing leaflet incompetency throughout systole, but it often
begins after S1 (eg, when chamber dilation during systole distorts the valve apparatus or when
myocardial ischemia or fibrosis alters dynamics). When the murmur begins after S1, it always continues
to the second heart sound (S2). The murmur radiates toward the left axilla; intensity may remain the
same or vary. If intensity varies, the murmur tends to crescendo in volume up to S2.
MR murmurs increase in intensity with handgrip or squatting because peripheral vascular resistance to
ventricular ejection increases, augmenting regurgitation into the LA; murmurs decrease in intensity with
standing or the Valsalva maneuver. A short rumbling mid-diastolic inflow murmur due to torrential
mitral diastolic flow may be heard following an S3. In patients with posterior leaflet prolapse, the
murmur may be coarse and radiate to the upper sternum, mimicking aortic stenosis.
MR murmurs may be confused with those of tricuspid regurgitation, which can be distinguished
because tricuspid regurgitation murmur is augmented during inspiration.
Diagnosis of Mitral Regurgitation
Echocardiography
An ECG and chest radiograph are usually performed initially although findings are not specific for mitral
regurgitation.
ECG may show LA enlargement and LV hypertrophy with or without ischemia. Sinus rhythm is usually
present when MR is acute because the atria have not had time to stretch and undergo remodeling.
Chest radiograph in acute MR may show pulmonary edema; abnormalities in cardiac silhouette are not
evident unless an underlying chronic disorder is also present. Chest radiograph in chronic MR may show
LA and LV enlargement (see image Chest Radiograph (Prosthetic Heart Valve)). It may also show
pulmonary vascular congestion and pulmonary edema with heart failure.
Diagnosis of mitral regurgitation is suspected clinically and confirmed by echocardiography. Doppler
echocardiography is used to detect regurgitant flow and pulmonary hypertension. Two-dimensional or
3-dimensional echocardiography is used to evaluate the leaflet morphology and motion; to determine
the cause and severity of MR (see table Grading of Mitral Regurgitation), the presence and extent of
annular calcification, and the size and function of the LV and LA; and to detect pulmonary hypertension.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 4/11
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
When it is acute, severe MR may not be apparent on color Doppler echocardiography, but suspicion is
raised when acute heart failure is accompanied by hyperdynamic LV systolic function.
Mitral Regurgitation
VIDEO
TABLE
Grading of Mitral Regurgitation
Parameter Moderate MR Severe MR
Vena contracta* 3–7 mm > 7 mm
Effective regurgitant
2 2
0.20–0.40 cm > 0.40 cm
orifice area
Regurgitant volume 30–60 mL > 60 mL
Regurgitant fraction 30–50% > 50%
* The narrowest diameter of the fluid stream downstream of an abnormal valve orifice; it is
slightly smaller than the anatomic valve orifice.
MR = mitral regurgitation.
Data from Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al: 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: Executive Summary: A Report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Circulation 143(5):e35–e71, 2021. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000932
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 5/11
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
If endocarditis or valvular thrombi are suspected, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) can
provide a more detailed view of the mitral valve and LA. TEE, with 3-dimensional imaging when feasible,
is also indicated to evaluate the mechanism of MR in more detail when mitral valve repair instead of
replacement is being considered.
Cardiac catheterization is performed before surgery, mainly to determine whether coronary artery
disease (CAD) is present. A prominent systolic c-v wave is seen on pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
(pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) tracings during ventricular systole. Ventriculography can be used
to quantify MR. Cardiac MRI can accurately measure regurgitant fraction and determine the cause of
dilated myopathy with MR.
Periodic exercise testing (stress ECG) is often performed to detect any decrease in exercise tolerance,
which would prompt consideration of surgical intervention. Periodic echocardiography is performed to
detect progression of MR.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 6/11
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Phonocardiographic Characteristics of Heart Murmurs
Treatment of Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral valve repair preferred for primary MR
Medical therapy or mitral valve replacement for secondary MR
Anticoagulants for patients with atrial fibrillation
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and other vasodilators do not delay LV dilation or MR
progression and so have no role in asymptomatic MR with preserved LV function. However, if LV dilation
or dysfunction is present, therapy using an angiotensin II receptor blocker, neprilysin inhibitor (eg,
sacubitril, combined with the angiotensin II blocker valsartan), aldosterone antagonist, and/or
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 7/11
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
vasodilating beta-blocker (eg, carvedilol) is indicated. In secondary MR, these medications can reduce
the severity of MR and may improve prognosis.
If the ECG shows left bundle branch block, then biventricular pacing may be beneficial for secondary
MR.
Loop diuretics such as furosemide are helpful in patients with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea. Digoxin
may reduce symptoms in patients with atrial fibrillation or those in whom valve surgery is not
appropriate.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not longer except for patients who have had valve replacement or repair
utilizing prosthetic materials (see table Recommended Endocarditis Prophylaxis During Oral-Dental or
Respiratory Tract Procedures).
Anticoagulants are used to prevent thromboemboli in patients with atrial fibrillation.
Indications for intervention
Acute mitral regurgitation requires emergency mitral valve repair or replacement with concomitant
coronary revascularization as necessary. Pending surgery, nitroprusside or nitroglycerin infusion and an
intra-aortic ballon pump may be used to reduce afterload, thus improving forward stroke volume and
reducing ventricular and regurgitant volume.
Chronic primary mitral regurgitation that is severe needs intervention at the onset of symptoms or
decompensation (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] ≤ 60% or LV end-systolic diameter ≥ 40 mm).
Even in the absence of these triggers, intervention may be beneficial when surgical risk is low and valve
morphology suggests a high likelihood of successful repair. Atrial fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension,
flail leaflet, or left atrial dilation alone is not an indication for intervention (1). When the EF falls to < 30%,
surgical risk is high, necessitating a careful weighing of risk and benefit.
Chronic secondary mitral regurgitation has fewer indications for intervention. Because the initial
pathology involves the LV muscle, correction of MR is not as beneficial and should be considered only
when significant symptoms persist despite a trial of guideline-directed management and therapy,
including biventricular pacing, if indicated. Patients with atrial functional mitral regurgitation may
benefit from surgery more than patients with other causes of secondary mitral regurgitation (eg,
regional or global ischemic changes) (2). Indications for transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER) are
wider (more permissive) than those for other surgical options.
For patients undergoing cardiac surgery for other indications, concomitant mitral valve surgery should
be considered for a repairable valve with MR that is moderate. However, for secondary MR, the value of
this practice is unclear. When studied, the addition of mitral valve repair compared with coronary artery
bypass grafting (CABG) alone did not affect LV remodelling or survival, but an excess of adverse events
occurred (3). Therefore, only severe secondary MR should be treated when CABG is being performed to
treat ischemia.
Choice of intervention
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 8/11
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In primary mitral regurgitation, the closer the mitral valve intervention mimics the native valve, the
better for LV preservation and mortality. Hence, the order of preference is:
1. Repair with leaflet remodelling and chordal replacement
2. Replacement with chordal preservation
3. Replacement with removal of chordae
If mitral valve repair with leaflet remodelling and chordal replacement is not feasible, replacement with
a mechanical prosthesis is preferred because tissue valves have reduced longevity in the mitral position.
A bioprosthesis is an option for older patients.
In secondary mitral regurgitation, mitral valve replacement is preferred over repair with a downsized
annuloplasty ring because mitral valve replacement results in less mitral regurgitation and heart failure
2 years after treatment (4). When the mechanism of secondary MR is annular dilation due to atrial
fibrillation, valve surgery may be beneficial when symptoms cannot be medically controlled.
Another method of repair is transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER) with a device that approximates
the mitral leaflets. TEER is an option for patients with severe primary MR and New York Heart
Association (NYHA) class III or class IV heart failure symptoms refractory to medical therapy who cannot
undergo surgery. In secondary MR, given the lesser benefit of surgery, TEER is indicated even for
patients whose surgical risk is not prohibitive if they have NYHA class II or IV symptoms refractory to
medical therapy, ejection fraction 20 to 50%, LV end-systolic diameter ≤ 70 mm, pulmonary artery
systolic pressure ≤ 70 mm Hg, and an anatomically suitable valve. In carefully selected patients, TEER
can reduce symptoms, induce reverse remodelling, and improve clinical outcomes, even though rates of
residual and recurrent MR are higher than with surgical repair (5). Clinical success and outcomes
depend on careful patient selection and clinical care, so most centers that offer TEER do so through a
specialized multidisciplinary heart team (1, 6, 7).
In some decompensated patients, prosthetic valve implantation markedly depresses ejection fraction
because in such patients, ventricular function has become dependent on the afterload reduction of MR.
For patients with atrial fibrillation, concomitant procedures such as ablation therapy and surgically
occluding the left atrial appendage to reduce the risk of stroke may be beneficial.
Anticoagulation
Lifelong anticoagulation with warfarin is required in patients with a mechanical valve to prevent
thromboembolism. A mitral bioprosthetic valve requires anticoagulation with warfarin for 3 to 6 months
postoperatively. Long-term non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants or warfarin can be considered in patients
with a bioprosthetic valve and atrial fibrillation (see also Anticoagulation for patients with a prosthetic
cardiac valve or native valve disease).
Treatment references
1. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al: 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 9/11
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation
143(5):e35–e71, 2021. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000932
2. Farhan S, Silbiger JJ, Halperin JL, et al: Pathophysiology, Echocardiographic Diagnosis, and
Treatment of Atrial Functional Mitral Regurgitation: JACC State-of-the-Art Review [published
correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol 2023 Feb 21;81(7):711]. J Am Coll Cardiol 80(24):2314–2330,
2022. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2022.09.046
3. Michler RE, Smith PK, Parides MK, et al: Two-year outcomes of surgical treatment of moderate
ischemic mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 374:1932–1941, 2016. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1602003
4. Goldstein D, Moskowitz AJ, Gelijns AC, et al: Two-year outcomes of surgical treatment of severe
ischemic mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 374:344–353, 2016. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1512913
5. Feldman T, Kar S, Elmariah S, et al: Randomized comparison of percutaneous repair and surgery
for mitral regurgitation: 5-year results of EVEREST II. J Am Coll Cardiol 66:2844–2854, 2015. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2015.10.018
6. Obadia JF, Messika-Zeitoun D, Leurent G, et al: Percutaneous repair or medical treatment for
secondary mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 379:2297–2306, 2018. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805374
7. Stone GW, Lindenfeld J, Abraham WT, et al: Transcatheter mitral-valve repair in patients with
heart failure. N Engl J Med 379:2307–2318, 2018. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1806640
Prognosis for Mitral Regurgitation
Prognosis of mitral regurgitation varies by duration, severity, and cause.
Some MR worsens and eventually becomes severe. Once MR becomes severe, approximately 8% of
asymptomatic patients become symptomatic each year thereafter.
Approximately 15% of patients with chronic moderate or severe MR require surgical intervention, with
surgical intervention being more common in primary versus secondary MR (1).
Prognosis reference
1. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al: 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation
143(5):e35–e71, 2021. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000932
Key Points
Common causes of mitral regurgitation (MR) include mitral valve prolapse, rheumatic
fever, and left ventricular dilation or infarction.
Acute MR may cause acute pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock or sudden cardiac
death.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 10/11
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 13:59 Mitral Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Chronic MR causes slowly progressive symptoms of heart failure and, if atrial fibrillation
develops, palpitations.
Typical heart sounds are a holosystolic murmur that is heard best at the apex, radiates
toward the left axilla, increases in intensity with handgrip or squatting, and decreases in
intensity with standing or the Valsalva maneuver.
Symptomatic patients and those meeting certain echocardiographic criteria benefit from
valve replacement or repair.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/mitral-regurgitation 11/11
