=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:45.409939",
  "file_size_bytes": 515417,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is a billowing of mitral valve leaflets into the left
atrium during systole. The most common cause is idiopathic myxomatous
degeneration. MVP is usually benign, but complications include mitral
regurgitation, endocarditis, and chordal rupture. MVP is usually asymptomatic
in the absence of significant regurgitation, although there are reports that
some patients experience chest pain, dyspnea, dizziness, and palpitations. Signs
include a crisp mid-systolic click, followed by a late systolic murmur if
regurgitation is present. Diagnosis is by physical examination and
echocardiography. Prognosis is excellent in the absence of significant
regurgitation, but chordal rupture and endocarditis may occur. No specific
treatment is necessary unless significant mitral regurgitation is present.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Mitral valve prolapse is common; prevalence is 2.4% in otherwise normal populations, depending on the
echocardiographic criteria used (1). Females and males are affected equally; onset usually follows the
adolescent growth spurt.
Reference
1. Freed LA, Levy D, Levine RA, et al. Prevalence and clinical outcome of mitral-valve prolapse. N
Engl J Med 1999;341(1):1-7. doi:10.1056/NEJM199907013410101
Etiology of Mitral Valve Prolapse
Mitral valve prolapse is most often caused by:
Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve leaflets and chordae tendineae
In myxomatous degeneration, the fibrous collagen layer of the valve thins and mucoid (myxomatous)
material accumulates. The chordae become longer and thinner and the valve leaflets enlarge and
become rubbery. These changes result in floppy valve leaflets that can balloon back (prolapse) into the
 1/6

 Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
left atrium when the left ventricle contracts. Rupture of a degenerate chorda can allow part of the valve
leaflet to flail into the atrium, which typically causes severe regurgitation.
Degeneration is usually idiopathic, although it may be inherited in an autosomal dominant or, rarely, in
an X-linked recessive fashion. Myxomatous degeneration may also be caused by connective tissue or
systemic rheumatic diseases (eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, adult polycystic kidney
disease, osteogenesis imperfecta, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, systemic lupus erythematosus,
polyarteritis nodosa) and muscular dystrophies. MVP is more common among patients with Graves
disease, hypomastia, von Willebrand disease, sickle cell disease, and rheumatic heart disease.
Myxomatous degeneration less commonly affects the aortic or tricuspid valve, resulting in aortic or
tricuspid prolapse.
Mitral annular disjunction (MAD) is partial detachment of the mitral annulus from adjacent ventricular
myocardium during systole, allowing for hypermobility of the mitral valve. MAD is strongly associated
with mitral valve prolapse and ventricular arrhythmias. Identification of MAD can alter the surgical
technique used for mitral valve repair.
Mitral regurgitation (MR) due to mitral valve prolapse may occur in patients with apparently normal
mitral valve leaflets (ie, nonmyxomatous) due to ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction or rheumatic
chordal rupture. Transient MVP may occur when intravascular volume decreases significantly, as occurs
in severe dehydration or sometimes during pregnancy (when the woman is recumbent and the gravid
uterus compresses the inferior vena cava, reducing venous return).
Complications
Mitral regurgitation is the most common complication of mitral valve prolapse. MR may be acute (due to
ruptured chordae tendineae causing flail mitral valve leaflets) or chronic.
Sequelae of MVP with MR include heart failure, infective endocarditis, and atrial fibrillation with
thromboembolism. Whether MVP causes stroke or endocarditis independent of MR and atrial fibrillation
is unclear.
Ventricular ectopy commonly occurs in mitral valve prolapse. Severe ventricular arrhythmias or high
ectopic burden occurs in < 10% of cases and is associated with sudden cardiac death (1). Features
associated with severe arrhythmias include severe myxomatous change of the valve leaflets, severe
mitral regurgitation, myocardial fibrosis, and MAD (2). MAD is repaired surgically, not by transcatheter
edge-to-edge repair (TEER).
Etiology references
1. Essayagh B, Sabbag A, Antoine C, et al. Presentation and Outcome of Arrhythmic Mitral Valve
Prolapse. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;76(6):637-649. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2020.06.029
2. Essayagh B, Sabbag A, El-Am E, Cavalcante JL, Michelena HI, Enriquez-Sarano M. Arrhythmic
mitral valve prolapse and mitral annular disjunction: pathophysiology, risk stratification, and
management. Eur Heart J 2023;44(33):3121-3135. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehad491
 2/6

 Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms and Signs of Mitral Valve Prolapse
Most patients with mitral valve prolapse are asymptomatic. Some experience nonspecific symptoms (eg,
chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations, dizziness, near syncope, migraines, anxiety) thought to be due to
associated abnormalities in adrenergic signaling and sensitivity rather than to mitral valve pathology. In
some patients, emotional stress precipitates palpitations, which may be a symptom of benign
arrhythmias (atrial premature beats, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, ventricular premature beats,
complex ventricular ectopy).
Occasionally, patients present with mitral regurgitation. Rarely, patients present with endocarditis (eg,
with fever, weight loss, thromboembolic phenomena) or stroke. Sudden death occurs in < 1%, most
often in patients with ruptured or otherwise abnormal chordae tendineae and/or flail mitral valve
leaflets. Death due to a ventricular arrhythmia is thought to be rare, but a significant fraction of patients
with sudden cardiac death have no associated structural cardiac abnormality (1, 2).
Other physical findings associated with but not diagnostic of MVP include hypomastia, pectus
excavatum, hypokyphosis (eg, straight back syndrome), and a narrow anteroposterior chest diameter.
Auscultation
Crisp mid-systolic click
Typically, mitral valve prolapse causes no visible or palpable cardiac signs.
MVP alone often causes a crisp mid-systolic click as the subvalvular apparatus abruptly tightens. The
click is heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the left apex when the patient is in the
left lateral decubitus position. MVP with MR causes a click with a late-systolic MR murmur. The click
moves closer to the first heart sound (S1) with maneuvers that decrease left ventricle (LV) size (eg,
sitting, standing, Valsalva maneuver); the same maneuvers cause an MR murmur to appear or become
louder and last longer. These effects occur because decreasing LV size causes papillary muscles and
chordae tendineae to pull together more centrally beneath the valve, resulting in quicker, more forceful
prolapse with earlier, more severe regurgitation. Conversely, squatting or isometric handgrip delays the
S1 click and shortens the MR murmur.
The systolic click may be confused with the click of congenital aortic stenosis; the latter may be
distinguished because it occurs very early in systole and does not move with postural or LV volume
changes. Other findings include a systolic honk or whoop, thought to be caused by valvular leaflet
vibration; these findings are usually transient and may vary with respiratory phase. An early diastolic
opening snap caused by return of the prolapsed valve to its normal position is rarely heard. In some
patients, especially children, the findings of MVP may be more noticeable after exertion.
AUDIO
Mitral Valve Prolapse (With Late-Systolic Click)
 3/6

 Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
AUDIO
Mitral Valve Prolapse
Symptoms and signs references
1. Han HC, Ha FJ, Teh AW, et al. Mitral Valve Prolapse and Sudden Cardiac Death: A Systematic
Review. J Am Heart Assoc 2018;7(23):e010584. doi:10.1161/JAHA.118.010584
2. Nalliah CJ, Mahajan R, Elliott AD, et al. Mitral valve prolapse and sudden cardiac death: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart 2019;105(2):144-151. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-
312932
Diagnosis of Mitral Valve Prolapse
Echocardiography
Mitral Valve Prolapse (Echocardiogram)
IMAGE
© SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA
Diagnosis of mitral valve prolapse is suggested clinically and confirmed by echocardiography. Thickened
(≥ 5 mm), redundant mitral valve leaflets are thought to indicate more extensive myxomatous
degeneration and greater risk of endocarditis and mitral regurgitation.
Mitral annular disjunction is diagnosed echocardiographically when frame by frame analysis of the
posterolateral annulus in the transthoracic parasternal long axis view reveals systolic separation of the
annulus and ventricular myocardium by a few millimeters up to a centimeter.
Mitral annular disjunction is associated with increased risk of sudden death from arrhythmia, and
ambulatory cardiac rhythm monitoring is recommended.
 4/6

 Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment of Mitral Valve Prolapse
Usually none
Sometimes beta-blockers
Mitral valve prolapse does not usually require treatment.
Beta-blockers (eg, atenolol, propranolol) and calcium channel blockers (eg, verapamil) decrease
symptoms due to associated ectopy but there is no evidence that they improve prognosis.
Treatment of atrial fibrillation may be required.
Treatment of mitral regurgitation depends on severity and associated left atrial and LV changes.
Antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis is not recommended, except after valve replacement.
Anticoagulants to prevent thromboembolism are recommended only for patients with atrial fibrillation
or prior transient ischemic attack or stroke. (See also Anticoagulation for patients with a prosthetic
cardiac valve or native valve disease.)
Prognosis for Mitral Valve Prolapse
Mitral valve prolapse is usually benign, but severe myxomatous degeneration of the valve can lead to
MR. The risk of progression to severe MR is related both to severity at initial diagnosis and specific
anatomic factors of the mitral valve itself (1, 2). The incidence of cardiac events (endocarditis, stroke,
cardioembolic event) in patients with significant MR due to mitral valve prolapse may be as high as 4%
annually (3). The prevalence of mitral valve prolapse is also higher in patients experiencing sudden
cardiac death than in the general population, suggesting an association (4).
Prognosis references
1. Delling FN, Rong J, Larson MG, et al. Evolution of Mitral Valve Prolapse: Insights From the
Framingham Heart Study. Circulation 2016;133(17):1688-1695.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.020621
2. Ma JI, Igata S, Strachan M, et al. Predictive Factors for Progression of Mitral Regurgitation in
Asymptomatic Patients With Mitral Valve Prolapse. Am J Cardiol 2019;123(8):1309-1313.
doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2019.01.026
3. Mecarocci V, Mori F. P210Long- term outcome of primary mitral valve prolapse: results from a
population of 250 patients referred to a tertiary cardiovascular center. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging 2016;17(suppl_2):ii29-ii37. doi:10.1093/ehjci/jew236.001
4. Nalliah CJ, Mahajan R, Elliott AD, et al. Mitral valve prolapse and sudden cardiac death: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart 2019;105(2):144-151. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-
312932
 5/6

 Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Mitral valve prolapse is most often caused by idiopathic myxomatous degeneration of
the mitral valve and chordae tendineae.
Mitral regurgitation (MR) is the most common complication.
Heart sounds often include a sharp, mid-systolic click that occurs earlier with the
Valsalva maneuver.
Prognosis is usually benign unless MR develops, in which case there is increased risk of
heart failure, atrial fibrillation, stroke, and infective endocarditis.
Treatment is not needed unless significant MR develops.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 6/6
