Myocardial ischaemia
In clinical practice electrocardiography is most often used to evaluate patients with suspected
ischaemic heart disease. When interpreted in the light of the clinical history, electrocardiograms can
be invaluable in aiding selection of the most appropriate management.
Electrocardiography is not sufficiently specific or sensitive to be used without a
patient's clinical history
Electrocardiography has limitations. A trace can suggest, for example, that a patient's heart is entirely
normal when in fact he or she has severe and widespread coronary artery disease. In addition, less
than half of patients presenting to hospital with an acute myocardial infarction will have the typical
and diagnostic electrocardiographic changes present on their initial trace, and as many as 20% of
patients will have a normal or near normal electrocardiogram.
Myocardial ischaemia causes changes in the ST-T wave, but unlike a full thickness myocardial
infarction it has no direct effects on the QRS complex (although ischaemia may give rise to bundle
branch blocks, which prolongs the QRS complex).
When electrocardiographic abnormalities occur in association with chest pain but in the absence of
frank infarction, they confer prognostic significance. About 20% of patients with ST segment
depression and 15% with T wave inversion will experience severe angina, myocardial infarction, or
death within 12 months of their initial presentation, compared with 10% of patients with a normal
trace.
Changes in the ST segment and T waves are not specific for ischaemia; they also occur in association
with several other disease processes, such as left ventricular hypertrophy, hypokalaemia, and digoxin
therapy.
T wave changes
Myocardial ischaemia can affect T wave morphology in a variety of ways: T waves may become tall,
flattened, inverted, or biphasic. Tall T waves are one of the earliest changes seen in acute myocardial
infarction, most often seen in the anterior chest leads. Isolated tall T waves in leads V1 to V3 may
also be due to ischaemia of the posterior wall of the left ventricle (the mirror image of T wave
inversion).
Suggested criteria for size of T wave
1/8 size of the R wave
<2/3 size of the R wave
Height <10 mm
As there are other causes of abnormally tall T waves and no commonly used criteria for the size of T
waves, these changes are not always readily appreciated without comparison with a previous
electrocardiogram. Flattened T waves are often seen in patients with myocardial ischaemia, but they
are very non-specific.
T wave inversion
T wave inversion can be normal
It occurs in leads III, aVR, and V1 (and in V2, but only in association with T wave
inversion in lead V1)
Myocardial ischaemia may also give rise to T wave inversion, but it must be remembered that
inverted T waves are normal in leads III, aVR, and V1 in association with a predominantly negative
QRS complex. T waves that are deep and symmetrically inverted (arrowhead) strongly suggest
myocardial ischaemia.
In some patients with partial thickness ischaemia the T waves show a biphasic pattern. This occurs
particularly in the anterior chest leads and is an acute phenomenon. Biphasic T wave changes usually
evolve and are often followed by symmetrical T wave inversion. These changes occur in patients with
unstable or crescendo angina and strongly suggest myocardial ischaemia.
ST segment depression
Typically, myocardial ischaemia gives rise to ST segment depression. The normal ST segment usually
blends with the T wave smoothly, making it difficult to determine where the ST segment ends and the
T wave starts. One of the first and most subtle changes in the ST segment is flattening of the
segment, resulting in a more obvious angle between the ST segment and T wave.
More obvious changes comprise ST segment depression that is usually planar (horizontal) or
downsloping. Whereas horizontal ST depression strongly suggests ischaemia, downsloping changes
are less specific as they are also found in association with left ventricular hypertrophy and in patients
taking digoxin. The degree of ST segment depression in any given lead is related to the size of the R
wave. Thus, ST segment depression is usually most obvious in leads V4 to V6 of the 12 lead
electrocardiogram. Moreover, because the height of the R wave varies with respiration, the degree of
ST depression in any one lead may vary from beat to beat. ST segment depression is usually not as
marked in the inferior leads because here the R waves tend to be smaller. Substantial (⩾2 mm) and
widespread (⩾2 leads) ST depression is a grave prognostic finding as it implies widespread
myocardial ischaemia from extensive coronary artery disease. ST segment depression may be
transient, and its resolution with treatment is reassuring. Modern equipment allows continuous ST
segment monitoring. Serial changes in the electrocardiogram over a few hours or days, especially
when the changes are associated with recurrent chest pain, are extremely helpful in confirming the
presence of ischaemic heart disease; serial changes confer a worse prognosis, indicating the need for
increased drug treatment or revascularisation interventions.
ST segment elevation
Transient ST segment elevation in patients with chest pain is a feature of ischaemia and is usually
seen in vasospastic (variant or Prinzmetal's) angina. A proportion of these patients, however, will
have substantial proximal coronary artery stenosis. When ST segment elevation has occurred and
 3/18
 
resolved it may be followed by deep T wave inversion even in the absence of enzyme evidence of
myocardial damage.
In patients with previous Q wave myocardial infarction the hallmark of new ischaemia is often ST
segment elevation. This is thought to be associated with a wall motion abnormality, or bulging of the
infarcted segment. It rarely indicates reinfarction in the same territory. When an electrocardiogram
shows persistent T wave inversion accompanying the changes of a previous acute myocardial
infarction, ischaemia in the same territory may cause “normalisation” of the T waves (return to an
upright position). Alternatively, further ischaemia may make the T wave inversion more pronounced.
Arrhythmias associated with acute myocardial ischaemia or infarction
Ventricular myocardial ischaemia may be arrhythmogenic, and extrasystoles are common. It used to
be thought that frequent extrasystoles of multifocal origin, bigeminy, couplets, or extrasystoles that
fell on the T wave (R on T) conferred a bad prognosis in the early hours of myocardial infarction and
predicted the onset of ventricular fibrillation. Clinical trials have clearly shown, however, that their
suppression by antiarrhythmic drugs had no effect on the frequency of subsequent ventricular
fibrillation.
Short runs of ventricular tachycardia are a bad prognostic sign and should probably be
treated
Ventricular fibrillation is the commonest unheralded fatal arrhythmia in the first 24 hours of acute
myocardial infarction. The prognosis depends almost entirely on the patient's proximity to skilled
medical help when the arrhythmia occurs. Cardiac arrest from ventricular fibrillation outside hospital
is associated with a long term survival of about 10%, compared with an initial survival of 90% when
cardiac arrest occurs after admission to a coronary care unit. Studies have shown that the key factor
in prognosis is the speed with which electrical defibrillation is delivered.
Tachycardias of supraventricular origin, with the exception of atrial fibrillation, are
uncommon after myocardial infarction. Atrial fibrillation occurs in about 10% of
patients and is more common in those with heart failure, diabetes, and valvular heart
disease. It may be transient or persistent and is often a marker of haemodynamic
instability
 4/18
 
Heart block
The artery supplying the atrioventricular node is usually a branch of the right coronary artery; less
commonly it originates from the left circumflex artery. In patients with proximal occlusion of the right
coronary artery causing an inferior infarction, the atrioventricular node's arterial supply may be
compromised resulting in various degrees of heart block. Atrioventricular block may be severe at first
but usually improves over subsequent days. Complete atrioventricular block usually gives way to
second degree and then first degree block. Although temporary transvenous cardiac pacing may be
necessary for patients who are haemodynamically compromised, it is not mandatory in stable
patients.
When complete atrioventricular block occurs in association with acute anterior
myocardial infarction, transvenous cardiac pacing is recommended
Profound bradycardia or atrioventricular block resulting from ischaemia may provoke an escape
rhythm. Such rhythms are the result of spontaneous activity from a subsidiary pacemaker located
within the atria, atrioventricular junction, or ventricles. An atrioventricular junction escape beat has a
normal QRS complex morphology, with a rate of 40-60 beats/min. A ventricular escape rhythm is
broad complex and generally slower (15-40 beats/min).