=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Myocarditis overview - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:42.956036",
  "file_size_bytes": 492607,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Myocarditis overview - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Myocarditis overview
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com)
Associate Editor(s)-in-Chief: Varun Kumar, M.B.B.S. Maliha Shakil, M.D. [2] (mailto:mshakil
@wikidoc.org) Homa Najafi, M.D.[3] (mailto:hnajafi@bidmc.harvard.edu)
Overview
Myocarditis is defined as inflammation of the myocardium. It may present with chest pain, ST
segment elevation, elevated biomarkers of myonecrosis, heart failure, and/ or sudden death.
Myocarditis can be classified clinicopathologically into fulminant myocarditis, acute myocarditis,
chronic active myocarditis, and chronic persistent myocarditis. During either an infection or a
hypersensitivity reaction, the inflammatory response may cause myonecrosis either directly or
indirectly as part of an autoimmune reaction. Life-threatening causes of myocarditis include
carbon monoxide poisoning and Dengue fever. Common causes of myocarditis include infections,
Lyme disease, and medications. Idiopathic myocarditis is the most common type of myocarditis
and is often suspected to be secondary to a viral infection. Myocarditis must be distinguished from
pericarditis and the life threatening condition of ST elevation myocardial infarction. In young
adults, up to 20% of all cases of sudden death are due to myocarditis. Myocarditis is slightly more
frequent among males than females. Myocarditis is usually self limiting and is associated with a
good prognosis especially if it is secondary to a viral infection. Patients rarely develop cardiac
failure, pulmonary edema, arrhythmias, or cardiogenic shock. In some instances, myocarditis may
be associated with sudden death. Patients with fulminant myocarditis have a good long term
prognosis if they survive the acute phase of the disease. The prognosis of fulminant myocarditis is
better than that of either acute myocarditis or giant cell myocarditis. The presence of left bundle
branch block, q waves, AV block, syncope and a left ventricular ejection fraction < 40% are
associated with sudden death and cardiac transplantation. The physical examination in patients
with myocarditis may reveal tachycardia, a cardiac gallop, mitral regurgitation due to left
ventricular dilation, and pedal edema suggestive of cardiac failure. A pericardial friction rub may
be noted in presence of concomitant pericarditis, a condition sometimes referred to as
myopericarditis.
Historical Perspective
Myocarditis was first discovered by Jean Baptiste Senac, a French physician, in 1794. The term
myocarditis was introduced by German physician Joseph Friedrich Sobernheim in 1837. In 1980s,
the World Health Organization and the International Society and Federation of Cardiology were
the first to differentiate between myocarditis and other cardiomyopathies. The Dallas criteria was
published in 1986 as a guideline for classification of myocarditis.
Classification
Myocarditis can be classified based on the causative, histological, and clinicopathological criteria.
Causative criteria include three main groups, as well as infectious, immune-mediated, and toxic
myocarditis. Based on the type of infiltrating cells myocarditis divided in lymphocytic,
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 1/6
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
eosinophilic, polymorphic, giant cell myocarditis, and cardiac sarcoidosis. Acute, fulminant,
chronic active, and chronic persistent are subtypes of clinicopathopogical classification.
Pathophysiology
During either an infection or a hypersensitivity reaction, the inflammatory response may cause
myonecrosis either directly or indirectly as part of an autoimmune reaction.
Causes
Life-threatening causes of myocarditis include carbon monoxide poisoning and Dengue fever.
Common causes of myocarditis include infections such as Lyme disease and medications.
Idiopathic myocarditis is the most common type of myocarditis and is often suspected to be
secondary to a viral infection.
Differentiating Myocarditis from other Diseases
Myocarditis must be distinguished from pericarditis and the life threatening condition of ST
elevation myocardial infarction.
Risk factors
There are no established risk factors for myocarditis.
Screening
There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine screening for myocarditis.
Epidemiology and Demographics
The incidence of myocarditis is approximately 10 to 20 per 100,000 patients worldwide. It
commonly affects younger individuals. Yong males are slightly more commonly affected by
myocarditis than females. There is no racial predilection to myocarditis. Viral infections especially
coxsackie B and enterovirus are the most common cause of myocarditis in developed countries.
While, In South America, Chagas' disease (caused by Trypanosoma cruzi) is the main cause of
myocarditis.
Natural History, Complications and Prognosis
Myocarditis is usually self limiting and is associated with a good prognosis especially if it is
secondary to a viral infection. Patients rarely develop cardiac failure, pulmonary edema,
arrhythmias, or cardiogenic shock. In some instances, myocarditis may be associated with sudden
death. Patients with fulminant myocarditis have a good long term prognosis if they survive the
acute phase of the disease. The prognosis of fulminant myocarditis is better than that of either
acute myocarditis or giant cell myocarditis. The presence of syncope, pulmonary hypertension,
biventricular dysfunction, left bundle branch block, q waves, AV block, and a left ventricular
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 2/6
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
ejection fraction < 40% are associated with sudden death and cardiac transplantation.
Complications of myocarditis include chronic dilated cardiomyopathy, heart block, congestive
heart failure, pericarditis, ventricular dysfunction, arrythmias, and sudden cardiac death.
Diagnosis
History and Symptoms
Myocarditis should be suspected in a patient with acute decompensation of cardiac function who is
at low risk of ischemic heart disease. A history of a recent (within the preceding 2-4 weeks) viral
illness is often elicited in a large number of patients with myocarditis. Cardiac specific symptoms
may become apparent usually in the subacute virus-clearing phase. In myocarditis due to drug
hypersensitivity, patients may give a history of ingesting an offending drug. In fulminant
myocarditis, patients present with the abrupt onset of flu-like symptoms and the abrupt onset of
heart failure symptoms. In chronic and acute myocarditis, the onset of symptoms may be more
insidious. Common symptoms of myocarditis include chest pain, pedal edema, palpitations, fever,
and joint pains.
Physical Examination
There are no specific findings for myocarditis. Patients with myocarditis usually show signs of
cardiac dysfunction and underlying diseases. The physical examination in patients with
myocarditis may reveal tachycardia, a cardiac gallop, mitral regurgitation due to left ventricular
dilation, and pedal edema suggestive of cardiac failure. A pericardial friction rub may be noted in
presence of concomitant pericarditis, a condition sometimes referred to as myopericarditis.
Laboratory Findings
Laboratory findings consistent with the diagnosis of myocarditis include elevated markers of
myonecrosis, inflammatory markers, and other biomarkers. Markers of myonecrosis include
creatine kinase (CK-MB), cardiac troponin I (cTnI) or T (cTnT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),
alanine transaminase (ALT), and aspartate transaminase (AST). Elevated levels of C-reactive
protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and leukocytosis are suggestive of myocarditis.
Serologic markers such as Fas, Fas ligand, interleukin-10 or antimyosin autoantibodies are of
prognostic value in myocarditis. Other auto-antibodies such as ANA and rheumatoid factor may
also be detected.
Electrocardiogram
The presence of ST segment elevation in patients with myocarditis can mimic pericarditis and
myocardial infarction. Arrhythmias and heart block may also be observed in myocarditis patients.
Myocarditis can be distinguished from pericarditis by the presence of PR depression in the patient
with pericarditis.
Endomyocardial Biopsy
Endomyocardial biopsy remains the gold standard test to evaluate for the presence of and to
subclassify the type of myocarditis. A small tissue sample of the endocardium and myocardium is
obtained via Croigokhiets hseidlpe uds dcelaivredr ioaucr secravtichese.t Beyr uizsiantgi oounr .s eTrvhicees , syaoum agprleee tois o utrh uesen o fe cvooakliuesa.ted by a pathologist
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 3/6
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
using immunochemistry and special staining techniques as necessary. Histopathological features
include abundant edema in the myocardial interstitium and an inflammatory infiltrate which is
rich in lymphocytes and macrophages. Focal destruction of myocytes as a result of the
inflammatory process results in left ventricular dysfunction. Endomyocardial biopsy is
recommended when the results would identify an underlying disease that is amenable to therapy.
Routine performance of endomyocardial biopsy is not recommended in all patients with
myocarditis.
Chest X Ray
Findings on chest x-ray suggestive of myocarditis include cardiomegaly, cephalization of the
pulmonary vessels and, Kerley B-lines in presence of heart failure pericardial thickening in
presence of pericarditis, pulmonary edema, and pleural effusion.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography in patients with myocarditis allows for serial assessment of left ventricular
dysfunction and can be used to distinguish fulminant (non-dilated hypocontractile left ventricle
with thick interventricular septum) from acute myocarditis (dilated hypocontractile left ventricle
with normal interventricular septum). Echocardiography may be helpful in the diagnosis of
myocarditis. Findings on an echocardiography suggestive of myocarditis include wall motion
abnormalities, systolic and diastolic dysfunction, changes in image texture, pericardial effusion,
and functional regurgitation through the AV valves.
CT scan
Cardiac CT scan may be helpful in the diagnosis of myocarditis. Cardiac CT scan can be used in
diagnosis of acute myocarditis ( subepicardial late iodine enhancement), exclusion of acute
coronary syndrome by CT angiography, and alternative diagnostic tool in patients with CMR
contraindications.
MRI
Cardiac MRI is indicated in patients with new or persisting symptoms of chest pain and congestive
heart failure, who have evidence of significant myocardial injury, in the absence of or in whom
there is a low suspicion of coronary atherosclerosis. Cardiac MRI findings associated with
myocarditis include myocardial inflammation, myocardial edema, capillary leak, and reduced left
ventricular function. While the CMR pattern of gadolinium hyperenhancement in ST segment
elevation myocardial infarction is transmural and extends from the endocardium to the
epicardium, the patchy, non-segmental hyperenhancement pattern in myocarditis in contrast
involves the epicardium and spares the subendocardium. CMR has a sensitivity of 76%, specificity
of 95.5%, and overall diagnostic accuracy of 85% when any-two of the following three sequences
are used, focal and global T2 signal intensity, myocardial global relative enhancement, and delayed
gadolinium enhancement.
Other Imaging Findings
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 4/6
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
Coronary angiography may be helpful in excluding either myocardial ischemia or infarction as the
cause of ST segment elevation, elevated cardiac biomarkers, or left ventricular dysfunction.
Nuclear imaging may be useful in diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis.
Other Diagnostic Findings
Treatment
Medical Therapy
Symptomatic treatment is the mainstay of therapy for patients with viral myocarditis. Supportive
therapy includes diuretics and inotropes for left ventricular failure. ACE inhibitor therapy may aid
in left ventricular remodeling. Among patients with fulminant myocarditis, placement of either an
intra-aortic balloon pump or a left ventricular assist device may be necessary as bridge to recovery.
Administration of antimicrobial therapy is recommended for bacterial myocarditis.
Immunosuppressive therapy may be effective in the management of giant cell myocarditis,
autoimmune myocarditis, and eosinophilic myocarditis. In patients with arrythmias, treatment
should be initiated only if arrhythmias are symptomatic or sustained. Myocarditis patients
presenting with conduction abnormalities, particularly Mobitz type II and complete heart block
require temporary pacemaker usually during the acute phase.
Surgery
Cardiac transplantation is sometimes required to treat refractory giant cell myocarditis. However,
the condition can recur in post-transplant patients.
Primary prevention
There are no established measures for the primary prevention of all types of myocarditis.
Vaccination against measles, rubella, mumps, poliomyelitis, and influenza could prevent
myocarditis secondary to these diseases.
Secondary prevention
Effective measures for the secondary prevention of myocarditis include, clinical evaluation, ECG,
and echocardiography. CMR, cardiac CT scan, nuclear assessment in patients that
echocardiography is undiagnostic. Patients should udergo cardiac function assessment at one and
six months and yearly after that.
References
Template:WH Template:WS
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaCcoeouktiiceasl hore ldpe vuisc ed ienlidvuesrt royu sru speprovritc feosr. tBhyis u ssiitne ga nodu rw see nreveicde yso, uyro vui eawgreer es utop poourrt euds De oonf actoioonksie |s E.ditorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 5/6
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 16:24 Myocarditis overview - wikidoc
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Myocarditis_overview 6/6
