=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:26.631511",
  "file_size_bytes": 451934,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Myocarditis
By Brian D. Hoit, MD, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised May 2024 | Modified Oct 2025
Myocarditis is inflammation of the myocardium with necrosis of cardiac
myocytes. Myocarditis may be caused by many disorders (eg, infection,
cardiotoxins, medications, and systemic disorders such as sarcoidosis) but is
often idiopathic. Symptoms can vary and can include fatigue, dyspnea, edema,
palpitations, and sudden death. Diagnosis is based on symptoms and clinical
findings of abnormal electrocardiography (ECG), cardiac biomarkers, and
cardiac imaging in the absence of cardiovascular risk factors. Endomyocardial
biopsy confirms clinical diagnosis of myocarditis. Treatment depends on the
cause, but general measures include medications and devices to treat heart
failure and arrhythmias and rarely surgery (eg, intra-aortic balloon pump, left
ventricular assist device, transplantation). Immunosuppression is of use in
certain types of myocarditis (eg, hypersensitivity myocarditis, giant cell
myocarditis, myocarditis caused by sarcoidosis).
Pathophysiology of Myocarditis
Myocarditis is inflammation of the myocardium with necrosis of cardiac myocyte cells. Biopsy-proven
myocarditis typically demonstrates inflammatory infiltrate of the myocardium with lymphocytes,
neutrophils, eosinophils, giant cells, granulomas, or a mixture.
The pathophysiology of myocarditis remains a subject of research. Potential mechanisms that lead to
myocardial injury include
Direct cardiomyocyte injury caused by an infectious or other cardiotoxic agent
Myocardial injury caused by an autoimmune reaction to an infectious or other cardiotoxic
agent
Myocardial inflammation can be diffuse or focal. Inflammation can extend into the pericardium causing
myopericarditis. The extent of myocardial involvement and extension into adjacent pericardium can
determine the type of symptoms. Diffuse involvement can lead to heart failure, arrhythmias and
sometimes sudden cardiac death. Focal involvement is less likely to cause heart failure but can lead to
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 1/8
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Involvement of the pericardium leads to chest pain and other
symptoms typical of pericarditis. Some patients remain asymptomatic whether myocardial involvement
is focal or diffuse.
Etiology of Myocarditis
Myocarditis may result from infectious or noninfectious causes. Many cases are idiopathic (see table
Causes of Myocarditis).
Infectious myocarditis is most often viral in the United States and other high income nations (1). The
most common viral causes in the United States are parvovirus B19 and human herpes virus 6. In lower
income nations, infectious myocarditis is most often associated with rheumatic carditis, Chagas disease,
or HIV infection (2). Direct myocardial injury due to infection with SARS-CoV-2, with symptoms ranging
from mild chest discomfort to fulminant myocarditis, is uncommon in patients with COVID-19, but the
risk of myocarditis is 16 times higher in those with infection than in those not infected (3).
Noninfectious causes include cardiotoxins, certain medications, and some systemic disorders.
Myocarditis caused by medications is termed hypersensitivity myocarditis. Myocarditis after mRNA-
based COVID-19 vaccination is rare and far less common than COVID-associated myocarditis (4). It
occurs mostly in adolescent and young adult males, usually within a week of vaccination, and is
generally mild.
Eosinophilic myocarditis has various causes. It is an inflammatory cardiomyopathy characterized by
eosinophilic infiltration; among the causes is hypersensitivity myocarditis (5).
TABLE
Causes of Myocarditis
Cause Examples
Giant cell arteritis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Autoimmune disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Takayasu arteritis
Gram-negative bacilli
Lyme disease
Bacterial infections Group A streptococci
Staphylococci
Tuberculosis
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 2/8
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Alcohol
Cardiotoxins
Cocaine
Blastomycosis
Candidiasis
Fungal infections
Coccidioidomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Idiopathic —
Inflammatory bowel disease
Inflammatory disorders
Sarcoidosis
Clozapine
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
Medications
Penicillins
Thiazide diuretics
Amebiasis
Parasitic infections Chagas disease
Toxoplasmosis
Radiation therapy —
Coxsackie B virus
HIV
Human herpes virus 6
Viral infections
Influenza virus
Parvovirus B19
SARS-CoV-2
Giant cell myocarditis
Giant cell myocarditis is a rare form of myocarditis with a fulminant course. The etiology is unclear but
may include an autoimmune mechanism. Biopsy shows characteristic multinucleated giant cells.
Patients with giant cell myocarditis present in cardiogenic shock and frequently have intractable
ventricular arrhythmias or complete heart block. Giant cell myocarditis has a poor prognosis but is
important to rule out in the setting of an otherwise healthy patient presenting in fulminant heart failure
or with intractable arrhythmias because immunosuppressive therapy can help improve survival.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 3/8
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Etiology references
1. Cooper LT Jr. Myocarditis. N Engl J Med 2009;360(15):1526-1538. doi:10.1056/NEJMra0800028
2. Tschöpe C, Ammirati E, Bozkurt B, et al. Myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy: current
evidence and future directions. Nat Rev Cardiol 2021;18(3):169-193. doi:10.1038/s41569-020-00435-
x
3. Boehmer TK, Kompaniyets L, Lavery AM, et al. Association Between COVID-19 and Myocarditis
Using Hospital-Based Administrative Data - United States, March 2020-January 2021. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70(35):1228-1232. Published 2021 Sep 3. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7035e5
4. Patone M, Mei XW, Handunnetthi L, et al. Risk of Myocarditis After Sequential Doses of COVID-19
Vaccine and SARS-CoV-2 Infection by Age and Sex. Circulation 2022;146(10):743-754.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059970
5. Zhong Z, Yang Z, Peng Y, Wang L, Yuan X. Diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic myocarditis. J
Transl Autoimmun 2021;4:100118. Published 2021 Sep 2. doi:10.1016/j.jtauto.2021.100118
Symptoms and Signs of Myocarditis
The clinical presentation of myocarditis is variable. Patients may be minimally symptomatic or have
fulminant heart failure and fatal arrhythmias. Symptoms depend on the etiology of the myocarditis as
well as the extent and severity of myocardial inflammation.
Heart failure symptoms may include fatigue, dyspnea, and edema. Patients may show signs of fluid
overload with crackles, elevated jugular venous pulses, and edema. Cardiac examination may be
significant for a third (S3) or fourth (S4) heart sound. Systolic murmurs of mitral regurgitation and
tricuspid regurgitation may be present in patients with ventricular enlargement.
Sudden cardiac death due to a fatal arrhythmia is sometimes the presenting feature. Patients may
experience preceding palpitations or syncope.
When patients have concomitant pericardial inflammation, they may present with chest pain typical of
pericarditis. Dull or sharp precordial or substernal pain may radiate to the neck, trapezius ridge
(especially the left), or shoulders. Pain ranges from mild to severe. Unlike ischemic chest pain, pain due
to pericarditis is usually aggravated by thoracic motion, cough, breathing, or swallowing food; it may be
relieved by sitting up and leaning forward. A pericardial friction rub may be auscultated in patients with
a pericardial effusion.
Certain clinical findings may be indicative of a specific cause of myocarditis. Infectious myocarditis may
be preceded by symptoms of fever, myalgias, and other symptoms depending on the exact pathogen.
Medication-related or hypersensitivity myocarditis may be accompanied by a rash. Enlarged lymph
nodes may be indicative of sarcoidosis as the underlying etiology. Fulminant heart failure and
arrhythmias may be indicative of giant cell myocarditis.
Myocarditis can be acute, subacute, or chronic. There are no set time-frames for each phase. The acute
phase typically lasts a few days while the subacute phase lasts weeks to months. If myocarditis does not
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 4/8
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
resolve after a few months, it is called chronic myocarditis. In some cases, myocarditis can lead to
dilated cardiomyopathy.
Diagnosis of Myocarditis
Electrocardiography (ECG) and cardiac enzymes
Cardiac imaging
Sometimes, endomyocardial biopsy
Tests to identify cause
Myocarditis should be suspected when otherwise healthy patients with no cardiac risk factors present
with symptoms of heart failure or arrhythmias. ECG, cardiac enzymes, and cardiac imaging are not
specific for myocarditis but can be diagnostic in the appropriate clinical setting (1).
ECG can be normal or abnormal in patients with myocarditis. ST segment abnormalities are common
and can mimic myocardial ischemia. ST segment elevation is sometimes seen, but more common
findings include nonspecific ST-T wave changes. Patients may experience conduction delays and atrial or
ventricular arrhythmias, including sinus tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation.
Cardiac enzymes can be abnormal in patients with acute myocarditis. Cardiac troponin and CK-MB
(creatine kinase muscle band isoenzyme) can both be elevated due to necrosis of cardiac myocytes.
Cardiac imaging can be abnormal in patients with myocarditis. An echocardiogram can be normal in
early or mild myocarditis, but segmental wall motion abnormalities (mimicking myocardial ischemia) can
be seen. Left ventricular dilation and systolic dysfunction can also be seen as in dilated cardiomyopathy.
Diastolic relaxation parameters are often abnormal on echocardiography. Cardiac MRI is important in
the diagnosis of myocarditis. Cardiac MRI of patients with myocarditis may show a characteristic pattern
of late gadolinium enhancement in the subepicardial and mid-myocardial walls (in contrast to ischemia
where late gadolinium enhancement is usually subendocardial with extension to mid-myocardial and
epicardial walls). Other diagnostic features of myocarditis on cardiac MRI are the presence of
myocardial edema and myocardial hyperemia relative to skeletal muscle.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 5/8
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MRI of Patient with Myocarditis and Pericardial Effusion
Hide Details
Patchy mid wall (bottom white arrow) and epicardial (top white arrow) delayed enhancement on
MRI is consistent with myocarditis. This patient also has a pericardial effusion (red arrow).
© 2017 Elliot K. Fishman, MD.
Endomyocardial biopsy showing inflammatory infiltrate of the myocardium with necrosis of adjacent
myocytes is the gold standard for diagnosis of myocarditis. However, this test has low sensitivity for
diagnosis for myocarditis due to sampling error. Therefore, a positive biopsy result is diagnostic for
myocarditis, but a negative result does not rule it out. In addition, the biopsy carries a risk of
complications, including myocardial rupture and death, so is not routinely done. Endomyocardial biopsy
should be done in cases of fulminant heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, or heart block or if results
would affect management (eg, if there is suspicion for giant cell myocarditis where prompt treatment
can decrease mortality rates).
Diagnosis of cause
After myocarditis is diagnosed, tests to determine etiology are done. In a young, previously healthy
adult who presents with symptoms of a viral infection and myocarditis, an extensive evaluation is
usually unnecessary. Differentiating viral from idiopathic myocarditis is difficult, expensive, and
generally of little practical importance.
A complete blood count (CBC) is helpful to assess for peripheral eosinophilia, which is present in
hypersensitivity myocarditis.
Cardiac catheterization may be useful for ruling out ischemia since myocarditis can mimic myocardial
infarction or myocardial ischemia.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 6/8
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In other cases, a biopsy of myocardial tissue may be needed to establish a diagnosis. Acid-fast stains of
myocardial tissue are essential if tuberculosis (TB) is considered possible (TB myocarditis can be
aggressive and can worsen rapidly with corticosteroid therapy). Myocardial samples are examined for
giant cells, which are characteristic of giant cell myocarditis, and the granulomas that occur in
sarcoidosis.
Other tests include acute-phase reactants, routine chemistry tests, cultures, autoimmune tests, and,
when appropriate, tests for HIV infection, SARS-CoV-2 infection, histoplasmosis complement fixation or
Lyme disease titers (in endemic areas), and antibody tests for coxsackievirus, influenza virus, and
streptococcus.
Diagnosis reference
1. Tschöpe C, Ammirati E, Bozkurt B, et al. Myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy: current
evidence and future directions. Nat Rev Cardiol 2021;18(3):169-193. doi:10.1038/s41569-020-00435-
x
Treatment of Myocarditis
Treatment of heart failure and arrhythmias
Treatment of underlying disorder
Treatment of heart failure includes diuretics and nitrates for symptomatic relief. In cases of fulminant
heart failure, intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), left ventricular assist device (LVAD), or transplantation
may be necessary. Long-term pharmacotherapy of heart failure involves angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors, beta-blockers, aldosterone antagonists, angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), or
angiotensin receptor/neprilysin inhibitors (ARNIs). Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are treated with
antiarrhythmic therapy. Heart block can be treated with temporary pacing but may require insertion of
a permanent pacemaker if conduction abnormalities persist.
Infectious myocarditis is generally treated with supportive therapy for associated heart failure and
arrhythmias. Antiviral therapy has not been shown to be helpful in the treatment of most viral
etiologies, but nirmatrelvir and ritonavir can help treat myocarditis due to SARS-CoV2 infection (1), and
oseltamivir can help treat myocarditis due to influenza (2). Corticosteroids may also help treat
myocarditis due to SARS-CoV2 infection (3). Bacterial etiologies may be treated with antibiotics, but
antibiotics have not been shown to be effective except possibly in the acute infectious phase. Parasitic
infection should be treated with appropriate antiparasitic medications.
Corticosteroids are appropriate for patients with eosinophilic or giant cell myocardial infiltrations or
myocarditis due to systemic rheumatic disorders (4). Hypersensitivity myocarditis is treated by
immediate discontinuation of the causative medication or cardiotoxin and corticosteroid therapy.
Patients with giant cell myocarditis have improved survival when treated with immunosuppressants,
usually corticosteroids and cyclosporine (5). Myocarditis caused by sarcoidosis can be treated with
corticosteroids or other immunosuppressants (6).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 7/8
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Myocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment references
1. Souza KM, Carrasco G, Rojas-Cortés R, et al. Effectiveness of nirmatrelvir-ritonavir for the
treatment of patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 and at high risk of hospitalization:
Systematic review and meta-analyses of observational studies. PLoS One 2023;18(10):e0284006.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0284006
2. WHO Guidelines for Pharmacological Management of Pandemic Influenza A(H1N1) 2009 and
Other Influenza Viruses. Geneva: World Health Organization; February 2010.
3. Kamarullah W, Nurcahyani, Mary Josephine C, Bill Multazam R, Ghaezany Nawing A, Dharma S.
Corticosteroid Therapy in Management of Myocarditis Associated with COVID-19; a Systematic
Review of Current Evidence. Arch Acad Emerg Med 2021;9(1):e32. Published 2021 Apr 16.
doi:10.22037/aaem.v9i1.1153
4. Ammirati E, Moslehi JJ. Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Myocarditis: A Review. JAMA
2023;329(13):1098-1113. doi:10.1001/jama.2023.3371
5. Cooper LT Jr, Hare JM, Tazelaar HD, et al. Usefulness of immunosuppression for giant cell
myocarditis. Am J Cardiol 2008;102(11):1535-1539. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.07.041
6. Baughman RP, Valeyre D, Korsten P, et al. ERS clinical practice guidelines on treatment of
sarcoidosis. Eur Respir J 2021;58(6):2004079. Published 2021 Dec 16. doi:10.1183/13993003.04079-
2020
Key Points
Clinical presentation of myocarditis is variable, ranging from subclinical symptoms to
fulminant heart failure, intractable arrhythmias, and sudden cardiac death.
Diagnosis is often based on clinical findings and noninvasive testing, including cardiac
MRI; do endomyocardial biopsy if patients present with fulminant heart failure or
intractable arrhythmias or if findings would change treatment.
Treat patients with heart failure and arrhythmias; immunosuppression is added for
sarcoidosis or medication-related myocarditis and giant cell myocarditis.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/myocarditis 8/8
