=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:02.728013",
  "file_size_bytes": 372479,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:41 Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis
By Attila Feher, MD, PhD, Yale University School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Oct 2025
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis is age-related loss of elasticity due to fibrosis
or calcification in the aorta and its major branches. No specific treatment is
available.
(See also Atherosclerosis.)
Arteriosclerosis is a general term for several disorders that cause thickening and loss of elasticity in the
arterial wall.
Atherosclerosis is discussed separately.
Nonatheromatous forms of arteriosclerosis include:
Arteriolosclerosis
Mönckeberg medial calcific sclerosis
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis causes intimal thickening and weakens and disrupts the elastic
lamellae. The smooth muscle layer (media) atrophies, and the lumen of the affected artery widens
(becomes ectatic), predisposing to aneurysm or dissection. Conditions associated with arteriosclerosis
include older age, hypertension, diabetes, vitamin D deficiency or excess, and some genetic conditions
(1). Intimal injury, ectasia, and ulceration may lead to thrombosis, embolism, or complete arterial
occlusion.
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis is usually asymptomatic until complications, such as aneurysms,
develop. It may be incidentally detected during imaging tests performed for unrelated reasons.
Arteriolosclerosis increases arteriolar rigidity and peripheral resistance, which may contribute to the
maintenance of hypertension.
There is no treatment for nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis beyond the control of typical cardiovascular
risk factors such as hypertension and dyslipidemia (1).
Arteriolosclerosis
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/arteriosclerosis/nonatheromatous-arteriosclerosis 1/3
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:41 Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Arteriolosclerosis affects distal arteries and commonly occurs in patients with diabetes or hypertension
(2). There are 2 histologically distinct forms (3):
Hyaline arteriolosclerosis affects small arteries and arterioles in patients with diabetes. It
is characterized by hyaline thickening of the arteriolar wall, which degenerates and narrows
the lumen, leading to diffuse ischemia, most notably in the kidneys.
Hyperplastic arteriolosclerosis is characterized by laminated, concentric thickening and
luminal narrowing. It may also involve fibrinoid deposits and necrosis of the vessel wall
(necrotizing arteriolitis).
Mönckeberg medial calcific sclerosis
Mönckeberg medial calcific sclerosis (also known as medial arterial calcification, Mönckeberg
arteriosclerosis, or medial calcific sclerosis) typically affects patients in middle age and older (4). This
age-related degeneration of the arterial media is characterized by focal calcification. The affected
arterial segments may become rigid, forming calcified tubes without luminal narrowing. The diagnosis
may be suggested by an elevated ankle-brachial index (though this finding is not reliable) and be visible
on plain radiograph and CT, while the medial location of calcification can be confirmed on intravascular
ultrasound or optical coherence tomography. While this disorder does not generally cause direct clinical
symptoms, it is clinically important because the reduced compressibility of the arteries can result in
false elevation of blood pressure readings.
Mönckeberg Medial Calcific Sclerosis
IMAGE
© SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA
References
1. Tölle M, Reshetnik A, Schuchardt M, Höhne M, van der Giet M. Arteriosclerosis and vascular
calcification: causes, clinical assessment and therapy. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015;45(9):976-985.
doi:10.1111/eci.12493
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/arteriosclerosis/nonatheromatous-arteriosclerosis 2/3
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:41 Nonatheromatous Arteriosclerosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
2. Greenberg SM, Ziai WC, Cordonnier C, et al. 2022 Guideline for the Management of Patients
With Spontaneous Intracerebral Hemorrhage: A Guideline From the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2022;53(7):e282-e361.
doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000407
3. Fishbein GA, Fishbein MC. Arteriosclerosis: rethinking the current classification. Arch Pathol Lab
Med. 2009;133(8):1309-1316. doi:10.5858/133.8.1309
4. Lanzer P, Schurgers L, Twarda-Clapa A, et al. Medial arterial calcification in ageing and disease:
current evidence and knowledge gaps. Eur Heart J. Published online June 27, 2025.
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaf341
Key Points
Nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis causes thickening and loss of elasticity in the arterial
wall in the absence of obvious atheromatous plaque.
There are 2 variants of nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis: arteriolosclerosis and
Mönckeberg medial calcific sclerosis.
Diabetes, hypertension, and age are risk factors for the development of
nonatheromatous arteriosclerosis.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/arteriosclerosis/nonatheromatous-arteriosclerosis 3/3
