=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:38.807834",
  "file_size_bytes": 191251,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Noninfective Endocarditis
(Nonbacterial Thrombotic Endocarditis)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Brenda L. Tesini, MD, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
Reviewed/Revised Jul 2024
Noninfective endocarditis refers to formation of sterile platelet and fibrin
thrombi on cardiac valves and adjacent endocardium in response to trauma,
circulating immune complexes, vasculitis, or a hypercoagulable state.
Symptoms are those of systemic arterial embolism. Diagnosis is by
echocardiography and negative blood cultures. Treatment consists of
anticoagulants.
Endocarditis usually refers to infection of the endocardium (ie, infective endocarditis). The term can also
include noninfective endocarditis, in which sterile platelet and fibrin thrombi form on cardiac valves and
adjacent endocardium. Noninfective endocarditis sometimes leads to infective endocarditis. Both can
result in embolization and impaired cardiac function.
Noninfective endocarditis is rare and the diagnosis usually made at autopsy (1). Clinical diagnosis is
based on a constellation of clinical findings rather than a single definitive test result.
General reference
1. Hurrell H, Roberts-Thomson R, Prendergast BD: Non-infective endocarditis. Heart 106(13):1023–
1029, 2020. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2019-315204
Etiology of Noninfective Endocarditis
Vegetations are not caused by infection. They may be clinically undetectable or become a nidus for
infection (leading to infective endocarditis), produce emboli, or cause valvular dysfunction. Valve
destruction is uncommon.
Catheters passed through the right side of the heart may injure the tricuspid and pulmonic valves,
resulting in platelet and fibrin attachment at the site of injury. In disorders such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), circulating immune complexes may result in friable platelet and fibrin vegetations
along a valve leaflet closure (Libman-Sacks lesions). These lesions do not usually cause significant
 1/4

 Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Overview of Infective and Noni...
VIDEO
valvular obstruction or regurgitation. Antiphospholipid syndrome (lupus anticoagulants, recurrent
venous thrombosis, stroke, spontaneous abortions, livedo reticularis) also can lead to sterile
endocardial vegetations and systemic emboli. Rarely, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, HIV infection, or
COVID-19 leads to noninfective endocarditis.
Marantic endocarditis
In patients with chronic wasting diseases, disseminated intravascular coagulation, mucin-producing
metastatic carcinomas (eg, of lung, stomach, or pancreas), or chronic infections (eg, tuberculosis,
pneumonia, osteomyelitis), large thrombotic vegetations may form on valves and produce significant
emboli to the brain, kidneys, spleen, mesentery, extremities, and coronary arteries. These vegetations
tend to form on congenitally abnormal cardiac valves or those damaged by rheumatic fever. Half of
patients with disseminated intravascular coagulation have noninfective endocarditis, suggesting a
relationship between the conditions.
Symptoms and Signs of Noninfective Endocarditis
Vegetations themselves rarely cause symptoms unless their size and location cause valvular
dysfunction, sometimes leading to dyspnea and/or palpitations. Symptoms result from embolization
and depend on the organ affected (eg, brain, kidneys, spleen, digits). Fever and a heart murmur are
sometimes present.
Diagnosis of Noninfective Endocarditis
Blood cultures
Echocardiography
 2/4

 Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Noninfective endocarditis should be suspected when patients who are chronically ill develop symptoms
suggesting arterial embolism. Serial blood cultures and echocardiography should be done. Negative
blood cultures and the presence of valvular vegetations (but not atrial myxoma) suggest the diagnosis.
Examination of embolic fragments after embolectomy can help make the diagnosis.
Differentiation from culture-negative infective endocarditis may be difficult but is important.
Anticoagulation is often needed in noninfective endocarditis but is avoided in infective endocarditis
unless there is a pre-existing requirement such as a mechanical valve. Assays for hypercoagulability,
antinuclear antibodies, and antiphospholipid syndrome should be done to evaluate for causes of true
noninfective endocarditis.
Brain imaging is done to help guide treatment.
Treatment of Noninfective Endocarditis
Anticoagulation
Management of the underlying condition
Rarely surgery
Unless brain imaging finds a lesion prone to hemorrhagic transformation, treatment consists of
indefinite anticoagulation with heparin (either intravenous unfractionated or subcutaneous low
molecular weight) (1). Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) and warfarin are not regarded as effective,
although no comparative trials have been undertaken in this rare condition (2).
Predisposing disorders should be treated whenever possible.
Cardiac surgery (eg. vegetation excision, valve replacement) may be considered in cases where there is
significant valvular dysfunction causing hemodynamic instability or recurrent embolic events despite
optimal medical therapy.
Treatment references
1. Whitlock RP, Sun JC, Fremes SE, Rubens FD, Teoh KH. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy
for valvular disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 2012;141(2
Suppl):e576S-e600S. doi:10.1378/chest.11-2305
2. Zmaili M, Alzubi J, Lo Presti Vega S, Ababneh E, Xu B. Non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis: A
state-of-the-art contemporary review. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2022;74:99-110.
doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2022.10.009
Prognosis for Noninfective Endocarditis
Prognosis is generally poor, more because of the seriousness of predisposing disorders than the cardiac
lesion.
 3/4

 Noninfective Endocarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Noninfective endocarditis is much less common than infective endocarditis.
Sterile vegetations form on heart valves in response to factors such as trauma,
circulating immune complexes, vasculitis, or a hypercoagulable state.
The sterile vegetations can embolize or become infected but rarely impair valvular or
cardiac function.
Evaluation is with echocardiography and exclusion of infective endocarditis using blood
cultures.
Prognosis depends mainly on the underlying disorder, which is often a serious illness.
Treatment is usually with anticoagulation.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 4/4
