=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:45.897683",
  "file_size_bytes": 293609,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Orthostatic Hypotension
By Andrea D. Thompson, MD, PhD, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2024
Orthostatic (postural) hypotension is an excessive fall in blood pressure (BP) when an upright position is
assumed. The consensus definition is a drop of > 20 mm Hg systolic, > 10 mm Hg diastolic, or both (1).
Symptoms of faintness, light-headedness, dizziness, confusion, or blurred vision occur within seconds to
a few minutes of standing and resolve rapidly on lying down. Some patients experience falls, syncope,
or even rarely generalized seizures. Exercise or a heavy meal may exacerbate symptoms. Most other
associated symptoms and signs relate to the cause.
Orthostatic hypotension is a manifestation of abnormal BP regulation due to various conditions, not a
specific disorder. Evidence suggests that disorders of postural hemodynamic control increase risk of
cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality (2, 3).
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
POTS (also called postural autonomic tachycardia, or chronic or idiopathic orthostatic intolerance) is a
syndrome of orthostatic intolerance in younger patients. POTS is defined by a heart rate of ≥ 120
beats/minute or an increase of ≥ 30 beats/minute when a patient moves from supine to a standing
position. Various symptoms (eg, fatigue, light-headedness, exercise intolerance, cognitive impairment)
and tachycardia occur upon standing; however, there is little or no fall in BP. The reason for symptoms
is unclear.
General references
1. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al: Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic
hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res
21(2):69–72, 2011. doi:10.1007/s10286-011-0119-5
2. Fedorowski A, Stavenow L, Hedblad B, et al: Orthostatic hypotension predicts all-cause mortality
and coronary events in middle-aged individuals (The Malmo Preventive Project). Eur Heart J
31(1):85–91, 2010. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehp329
3. Verwoert GC, Mattace-Raso FU, Hofman A, et al: Orthostatic hypotension and risk of
cardiovascular disease in elderly people: the Rotterdam study. J Am Geriatr Soc 56(10):1816–1820,
2008. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01946.x
 1/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Pathophysiology of Orthostatic Hypotension
Normally, the gravitational stress of suddenly standing causes blood (½ to 1 L) to pool in the veins of the
legs and trunk. The subsequent transient decrease in venous return reduces cardiac output and thus
BP. In response, baroreceptors in the aortic arch and carotid sinus activate autonomic reflexes to
rapidly return BP to normal. The sympathetic nervous system increases heart rate and contractility and
increases vasomotor tone of the capacitance vessels. Simultaneous parasympathetic (vagal) inhibition
also increases heart rate. In most people, changes in BP and heart rate upon standing are minimal and
transient, and symptoms do not occur.
With continued standing, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and vasopressin
(antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) secretion cause sodium and water retention and increase circulating
blood volume.
Etiology of Orthostatic Hypotension
Homeostatic mechanisms may be inadequate to restore low BP if afferent, central, or efferent portions
of the autonomic reflex arc are impaired by disorders or medications, if myocardial contractility or
vascular responsiveness is depressed, if hypovolemia is present, or if hormonal responses are faulty
(see table Causes of Orthostatic Hypotension).
Causes differ depending on whether symptoms are acute or chronic.
The most common causes of acute orthostatic hypotension include
Hypovolemia
Medications
Prolonged bed rest
The most common causes of chronic orthostatic hypotension include
Age-related changes in BP regulation
Medications
Autonomic dysfunction
Postprandial orthostatic hypotension is also common. It may be caused by the insulin response to high-
carbohydrate meals and blood pooling in the gastrointestinal tract; this condition is worsened by
alcohol intake.
TABLE
Causes of Orthostatic Hypotension
Cause Examples
Neurologic (involving autonomic dysfunction)
 2/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Multiple system atrophy
Central Parkinson disease
Strokes (multiple)
Tabes dorsalis
Spinal cord Transverse myelitis
Tumors
Amyloidosis
Diabetic, alcohol-related, or nutritional
neuropathy
Familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day
syndrome)
Peripheral
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Pure autonomic failure
Surgical sympathectomy
Cardiovascular
Dehydration
Hemorrhage
Hypovolemia
Hyperthyroidism
Adrenal insufficiency
Bed rest (prolonged)
Impaired vasomotor tone
Hypokalemia
Impaired cardiac output Aortic stenosis
Left ventricular outflow obstruction (ie,
hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy)
Constrictive pericarditis, pericardial
effusion with tamponade
Heart failure
Myocardial infarction
 3/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias
Hyperaldosteronism*
Other Peripheral venous insufficiency
Pheochromocytoma*
Medications and drugs
Calcium channel blockers
Vasodilators
Nitrates
Alpha-blockers (eg, terazosin, doxazosin,
phenoxybenzamine)
Antihypertensives (eg, clonidine,
methyldopa, [rarely] beta-blockers)†
Autonomically active
Antipsychotics (particularly
phenothiazines)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
Tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants
Alcohol
Barbiturates
Diuretics (eg, loop diuretics such as
furosemide, thiazide diuretics such as
Other
hydrochlorothiazide)
Levodopa (in Parkinson disease [rarely])
Quinidine
Vincristine (neurotoxic)
* Disorder causes supine hypertension.
† Symptoms are more common when treatment is begun.
Evaluation of Orthostatic Hypotension
Orthostatic hypotension is diagnosed when systolic BP drops by ≥ 20 mm Hg or diastolic BP drops by ≥
10 mm Hg within 3 minutes of standing. Once orthostatic hypotension is diagnosed, a cause must be
 4/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
sought.
History
History of present illness should identify the duration and severity (eg, whether associated with
syncope or falls) of symptoms. The patient is asked about known triggers (eg, medications, bed rest,
fluid loss) and the relationship of symptoms to meals.
Review of symptoms seeks symptoms of causative disorders, particularly symptoms of autonomic
insufficiency such as visual impairment (due to mydriasis and loss of accommodation), incontinence or
urinary retention, constipation, heat intolerance (due to impaired sweating), and erectile dysfunction.
Other important symptoms include tremor, rigidity, and difficulty walking (Parkinson disease, multiple
system atrophy); weakness and fatigue (adrenal insufficiency, anemia); and black, tarry stool
(gastrointestinal hemorrhage). Other symptoms of neurologic and cardiovascular disorders and cancer
are noted.
Past medical history should identify known potential causes, including diabetes, Parkinson disease,
and cancer (ie, causing a paraneoplastic syndrome). The medication profile should be reviewed for
offending prescription medications (see table Causes of Orthostatic Hypotension), particularly
antihypertensives and nitrates. A family history of orthostatic symptoms suggests possible familial
dysautonomia.
Physical examination
BP and heart rate are measured after 5 minutes supine and at 1 and 3 minutes after standing; patients
unable to stand may be assessed while sitting upright. Hypotension without a compensatory increase in
heart rate (< 10 beats/minute) suggests autonomic impairment. Marked increase (to > 100 beats/minute
or by > 30 beats/minute) suggests hypovolemia or, if symptoms develop without hypotension, POTS.
The skin and mucosae are inspected for signs of dehydration and for pigment changes suggestive of
Addison disease (eg, hyperpigmented areas, vitiligo).
The extent of physical examination is guided by clinical suspicion. A rectal examination is done to
evaluate for gastrointestinal bleeding.
A detailed neurologic examination should include evaluation for peripheral neuropathy (eg,
abnormalities of strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflexes).
Red flags
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
Bloody or heme-positive stool
Abnormal neurologic examination
Interpretation of findings
 5/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In patients with acute symptoms, the most common causes—medications, bed rest, and volume
depletion—are often apparent clinically.
In patients with chronic symptoms, an important goal is to detect any neurologic disorder causing
autonomic dysfunction. Patients with movement abnormalities may have Parkinson disease or multiple
system atrophy. Patients with findings of peripheral neuropathy may have an apparent cause (eg,
diabetes, alcohol use disorder), but a paraneoplastic syndrome due to an occult cancer and amyloidosis
must be considered. Patients who have only peripheral autonomic symptoms may have pure autonomic
failure.
Testing
ECG, serum electrolytes, creatinine, and glucose are routinely checked. However, these and other tests
are usually of little benefit unless suggested by specific symptoms.
The dose of a suspected medication may be reduced or the medication stopped to confirm the
medication as the cause.
Tilt table testing may be done when autonomic dysfunction is suspected; it gives more consistent
results than supine and upright BP assessment and eliminates augmentation of venous return by leg
muscle contraction. The patient may remain upright for 30 to 45 minutes of BP assessment.
Patients with autonomic symptoms or signs require further evaluation for diabetes, Parkinson disease,
and possibly multiple system atrophy and pure autonomic failure. Testing for pure autonomic failure
may require plasma norepinephrine or vasopressin (ADH) measurements with the patient supine and
upright.
Autonomic function can also be evaluated with bedside cardiac monitoring, although this test is not
often done. When the autonomic system is intact, heart rate increases in response to inspiration. The
heart is monitored as the patient breathes slowly and deeply (about a 5-second inspiration and a 7-
second expiration) for 1 minute. The longest inter-beat (R-R) interval during expiration is normally at
least 1.15 times the minimum R-R interval during inspiration; a shorter interval suggests autonomic
dysfunction, but this response to inspiration may decrease with aging. A similar variation in R-R interval
should exist between rest and a 10- to 15-second Valsalva maneuver.
Treatment of Orthostatic Hypotension
Nonpharmacologic interventions
Patients requiring prolonged bed rest should sit up each day and exercise in bed when possible.
Patients should rise slowly from a recumbent or sitting position, consume adequate fluids, limit or avoid
alcohol, and exercise regularly when feasible. Regular modest-intensity exercise promotes overall
vascular tone and reduces venous pooling. Older patients should avoid prolonged standing. Sleeping
with the head of the bed raised may relieve symptoms by promoting sodium retention and reducing
nocturnal diuresis.
 6/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Postprandial hypotension can often be prevented by reducing the size and carbohydrate content of
meals, minimizing alcohol intake, and avoiding sudden standing after meals.
Waist-high fitted elastic hose may increase venous return, cardiac output, and BP after standing. In
severe cases, inflatable aviator-type antigravity suits, although often poorly tolerated, may be needed to
produce adequate leg and abdominal counterpressure.
Increasing sodium and water intake may expand intravascular volume and lessen symptoms. In the
absence of heart failure or hypertension, sodium intake can be increased to 6 to 10 g daily by liberally
salting food or taking sodium chloride tablets. This approach risks heart failure, particularly in older
patients and in patients with impaired myocardial function; development of dependent edema without
heart failure does not contraindicate continuing this approach.
Pharmacotherapy
Fludrocortisone, a mineralocorticoid, causes sodium retention, which expands plasma volume, and
often lessens symptoms but is effective only when sodium intake is adequate. Dosage is 0.1 mg orally at
bedtime, increased weekly to 1 mg or until peripheral edema occurs. This medication may also improve
the peripheral vasoconstrictor response to sympathetic stimulation. Supine hypertension, heart failure,
and hypokalemia may occur; potassium supplements may be needed.
Midodrine, a peripheral alpha-agonist that is both an arterial and a venous constrictor, is often effective.
Dosage is 2.5 mg to 10 mg orally 3 times a day. Adverse effects include paresthesias and itching
(probably secondary to piloerection). This medication is not recommended for patients with coronary
artery or peripheral arterial disease.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs—eg, indomethacin 25 to 50 mg orally 3 times a day) may
inhibit prostaglandin-induced vasodilation, increasing peripheral vascular resistance. However, NSAIDs
may cause gastrointestinal symptoms and unwanted vasopressor reactions (reported with concurrent
use of indomethacin and sympathomimetic medications).
Droxidopa, a norepinephrine precursor, may be beneficial for autonomic dysfunction.
Propranolol or other beta-blockers may enhance the beneficial effects of sodium and mineralocorticoid
therapy. Beta-blockade with propranolol leads to unopposed alpha-adrenergic peripheral vascular
vasoconstriction, preventing the vasodilation that occurs when some patients stand.
Pyridostigmine (1) and octreotide (2) have been effective in small clinical studies.
Treatment references
1. Singer W, Sandroni P, Opfer-Gehrking TL, et al: Pyridostigmine treatment trial in neurogenic
orthostatic hypotension. Arch Neurol 63(4):513–518, 2006. doi:10.1001/archneur.63.4.noc50340
2. Hoeldtke RD, Israel BC: Treatment of orthostatic hypotension with octreotide. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 68(6):1051–1059, 1989. doi:10.1210/jcem-68-6-1051
 7/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Geriatrics Essentials: Orthostatic Hypotension
Orthostatic hypotension occurs in approximately 15 to 20% of older adults (1). It is more common
among people with coexisting disorders, especially hypertension, and among residents of long-term
care facilities. Many falls may result from unrecognized orthostatic hypotension.
The increased incidence in older adults is due to decreased baroreceptor responsiveness plus
decreased arterial compliance. Decreased baroreceptor responsiveness delays cardioacceleration and
peripheral vasoconstriction in response to standing. Paradoxically, hypertension may contribute to poor
baroreceptor sensitivity, increasing vulnerability to orthostatic hypotension. Older adults also have
decreased resting parasympathetic tone, so that cardioacceleration due to reflex vagal withdrawal is
lessened.
Geriatrics essentials reference
1. Rutan GH, Hermanson B, Bild DE, Kittner SJ, LaBaw F, Tell GS: Orthostatic hypotension in older
adults. The Cardiovascular Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. Hypertension 19(6 Pt
1):508–519, 1992. doi:10.1161/01.hyp.19.6.508
Key Points
Orthostatic hypotension typically involves volume depletion or autonomic dysfunction.
Some degree of autonomic dysfunction is common in older adults, but neurologic
disorders must be ruled out.
Tilt table testing is sometimes done.
Treatment involves physical measures to reduce venous pooling, increased sodium
intake, and sometimes fludrocortisone or midodrine.
More Information
The following English-language resource may be useful. Please note that THE MANUAL is not
responsible for the content of this resource.
Freeman R, Abuzinadah AR, Gibbons C, et al: Orthostatic hypotension: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am
Coll Cardiol 72(11):1294–1309, 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2018.05.079
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 8/9

 Orthostatic Hypotension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
 9/9
