=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:16.138852",
  "file_size_bytes": 472201,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Overview of Heart Failure
(Congestive Heart Failure)
By Nowell M. Fine, MD, SM, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Oct 2025
Heart failure (HF) is a clinical syndrome in which the heart is not able to meet
the metabolic demands of the body due to a structural and or functional
cardiac abnormality, leading to low cardiac output, elevated ventricular filling
pressure, or both. HF can involve systolic and/or diastolic function, in the left
and/or right heart. Left ventricular (LV) failure typically causes shortness of
breath and fatigue, and right ventricular (RV) failure typically causes peripheral
and abdominal fluid accumulation; the ventricles can be involved together or
separately. Diagnosis is initially clinical, supported by chest radiography,
echocardiography, hemodynamic evaluation, and laboratory testing. Treatment
includes patient education, treating the cause(s) of the HF syndrome,
pharmacologic therapy including neurohormonal modulation, implantable
pacemakers/defibrillators, mechanical circulatory support, and heart
transplantation.
Heart failure affects more than 64 million people worldwide (1). In the United States, there are
approximately 6.7 million people with heart failure and approximately 1 million new cases per year; 8.7
million people are projected to have heart failure by 2030 (2, 3).
(See also table Common Causes of Heart Failure in Children.)
General references
1. Savarese G, Becher PM, Lund LH, Seferovic P, Rosano GMC, Coats AJS. Global burden of heart
failure: a comprehensive and updated review of epidemiology [published correction appears in
Cardiovasc Res. 2023 Jun 13;119(6):1453. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvad026.]. Cardiovasc Res.
2023;118(17):3272-3287. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvac013
2. Bozkurt B, Ahmad T, Alexander K, et al. HF STATS 2024: Heart Failure Epidemiology and
Outcomes Statistics An Updated 2024 Report from the Heart Failure Society of America. J Card Fail.
2025;31(1):66-116. doi:10.1016/j.cardfail.2024.07.001
3. Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2020 Update: A Report
From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;141(9):e139-e596.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 1/15
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000757
Cardiovascular Physiology
Cardiac contractility (force and velocity of contraction), ventricular performance, and myocardial oxygen
requirements are determined by:
Preload
Afterload
Substrate availability (eg, oxygen, fatty acids, glucose)
Heart rate and rhythm
Amount of viable myocardium
Cardiac output is the product of stroke volume and heart rate; it is also affected by venous return,
peripheral vascular tone, and neurohumoral factors.
Preload is the loading condition of the heart at the end of its relaxation and filling phase (diastole) just
before contraction (systole). Preload represents the degree of end-diastolic fiber stretch and end-
diastolic volume, which is influenced by ventricular diastolic volume and pressure and the composition
of the myocardial wall. Typically, left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic pressure, especially if higher than
normal, is a reasonable measure of preload. LV dilation, hypertrophy, and changes in myocardial
distensibility (compliance) modify preload. Preload is not identical to, but is largely a function of, the
body's overall intravascular volume status.
Afterload is the force resisting myocardial fiber contraction at the start of systole. It is determined by LV
chamber pressure, radius, and wall thickness at the time the aortic valve opens. Clinically, systemic
systolic blood pressure at or shortly after the aortic valve opens correlates with peak systolic wall stress
and approximates afterload.
The Frank-Starling principle describes the relationship between preload and cardiac performance. It
states that, normally, systolic performance (often estimated by stroke volume) is proportional to
preload within the normal physiologic range (see figure Frank-Starling Principle). In patients with heart
failure, systolic performance and myocardial contractility are reduced when compared to those with a
healthy heart at the same preload. Contractility is difficult to measure clinically (because it requires
cardiac catheterization with pressure-volume analysis) but is reasonably reflected by the ejection
fraction (EF), which is the percentage of end-diastolic volume ejected with each contraction (stroke
volume/end-diastolic volume). EF can generally be adequately assessed noninvasively with
echocardiography, nuclear imaging, or MRI.
The force-frequency relationship refers to the phenomenon in which repetitive stimulation of a
muscle within a certain frequency range results in increased force of contraction. Normal cardiac
muscle at typical heart rates exhibits a positive force-frequency relationship, so a faster rate causes
stronger contraction (and corresponding greater substrate requirements). During some types of heart
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 2/15
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
failure, the force-frequency relationship may become negative, so that myocardial contractility
decreases as heart rate increases above a certain rate.
Cardiac reserve is the ability of the heart to increase its performance above resting levels in response
to emotional or physical stress; body oxygen consumption may increase from 250 mL/minute to ≥ 1500
mL/minute during maximal exertion. Mechanisms include:
Increasing heart rate
Increasing diastolic filling volumes
Increasing contractility and stroke volume
Selectively altering systemic vascular resistance to direct blood flow toward certain organs
(eg, skeletal muscle during exercise)
Increasing tissue extraction of oxygen (the difference between oxygen content in arterial
blood and in mixed venous or pulmonary artery blood)
In well-trained young adults during maximal exercise, heart rate may increase from 55 to 70
beats/minute at rest to > 180 beats/minute, and cardiac output may increase from 6 L/minute to ≥ 25
L/minute. At rest, arterial blood contains approximately 18 mL oxygen/dL of blood, and mixed venous or
pulmonary artery blood contains approximately 14 mL/dL. Oxygen extraction is thus approximately 4
mL/dL. When demand is increased, oxygen extraction may increase to 12 to 14 mL/dL. This mechanism
also helps compensate for reduced tissue blood flow in heart failure.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 3/15
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Frank-Starling Principle
Normally (top curve), as preload increases, cardiac performance also increases. However, at a
certain point, performance plateaus, then declines. In heart failure (HF) due to systolic
dysfunction (bottom curve), the overall curve shifts downward, reflecting reduced cardiac
performance at a given preload, and as preload increases, cardiac performance increases
less. With treatment (middle curve), performance is improved, although not normalized.
Pathophysiology of Heart Failure
In heart failure, the heart may not provide tissues with adequate blood for metabolic needs, and
cardiac-related elevation of pulmonary or systemic venous pressures may result in organ congestion.
This condition can result from abnormalities of systolic or diastolic function or, commonly, both.
Although a primary abnormality can be a change in cardiomyocyte function, there are also changes in
collagen turnover of the extracellular matrix. Cardiac structural defects (eg, congenital defects, valvular
disorders), rhythm abnormalities (including persistently high heart rate), and high metabolic demand
(eg, due to thyrotoxicosis) also can cause heart failure.
Classification of heart failure
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 4/15
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Overview of Heart Failure
VIDEO
Heart failure can be classified as primarily left or right heart failure, or by the Universal Definition and
Classification of Heart Failure (1), which uses the left ventricular ejection fraction.
The traditional distinction between left and right ventricular failure is somewhat misleading because the
heart is an integrated pump, and changes in one chamber ultimately affect the whole heart. However,
these terms indicate the major site of pathology leading to heart failure and can be useful for initial
evaluation and treatment. Other common terms used to differentiate types of and causes for heart
failure include acute or chronic; high output or low output; dilated or nondilated; and ischemic,
hypertensive, or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Treatment also differs based on whether the
presentation is acute or chronic HF.
LV failure
Heart failure most commonly occurs as a result of left ventricular dysfunction (2). As a result, the
Universal Classification of Heart Failure has categorized heart failure according to reduced, preserved,
minimally reduced, and improved ejection fraction based on left ventricular systolic function (1). In left
heart failure, cardiac output decreases and pulmonary venous pressure increases. When pulmonary
capillary pressure exceeds the oncotic pressure of plasma proteins (approximately 24 mm Hg), fluid
extravasates from the capillaries into the interstitial space and alveoli, reducing pulmonary compliance
and increasing the work of breathing. Lymphatic drainage increases but cannot compensate for the
increase in pulmonary fluid. Marked fluid accumulation in alveoli (pulmonary edema) significantly alters
ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) relationships. Deoxygenated pulmonary arterial blood passes through poorly
ventilated alveoli, decreasing systemic arterial oxygenation (partial pressure of arterial oxygen [PaO2])
and causing dyspnea. However, dyspnea may occur before V/Q abnormalities, probably because of
elevated pulmonary venous pressure and increased work of breathing; the precise mechanism is
unclear.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 5/15
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In severe or chronic LV failure, pleural effusions characteristically develop, further aggravating dyspnea.
Minute ventilation increases; thus, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) decreases and
blood pH increases (respiratory alkalosis). Marked interstitial edema of the small airways may interfere
with ventilation, elevating PaCO2—a sign of impending respiratory failure.
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF)
In HFrEF (also called systolic heart failure), global LV systolic dysfunction predominates. The LV contracts
poorly and empties inadequately, leading to:
Increased diastolic volume and pressure
Decreased ejection fraction (≤ 40%)
Many defects in energy utilization, energy supply, electrophysiologic function, and contractile element
interaction occur, with abnormalities in intracellular calcium modulation and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) production.
Predominant systolic dysfunction is common in heart failure due to myocardial infarction, myocarditis,
and dilated cardiomyopathy. Systolic dysfunction may affect primarily the LV or the right ventricle (RV);
LV failure often leads to RV failure.
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
In HFpEF (also called diastolic heart failure), LV filling is impaired, resulting in:
Increased LV end-diastolic pressure at rest or during exertion
Usually, normal LV end-diastolic volume
Global contractility and hence LV ejection fraction remain normal (≥ 50%).
However, in some patients, marked restriction to LV filling can cause inappropriately low LV end-
diastolic volume and thus cause low cardiac output and systemic symptoms. Elevated left atrial
pressures can cause pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary congestion.
Diastolic dysfunction usually results from impaired ventricular relaxation (an active process), increased
ventricular stiffness, valvular disease, or constrictive pericarditis. Acute myocardial ischemia is also a
cause of diastolic dysfunction. Resistance to filling increases with age, reflecting cardiomyocyte
dysfunction and cardiomyocyte loss, and increased interstitial collagen deposition; thus, diastolic
dysfunction is particularly common among older adults. Diastolic dysfunction predominates in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, other disorders with ventricular hypertrophy (eg, hypertension,
significant aortic stenosis), and amyloid infiltration of the myocardium. LV filling and function may also
be impaired if marked increases in RV pressure shift the interventricular septum to the left.
Diastolic dysfunction is recognized as an important cause of HF. Approximately 50% of patients with
heart failure have HFpEF; the prevalence increases with age and in patients with diabetes (3). HFpEF is a
complex, heterogenous, multiorgan, systemic syndrome, often with multiple concomitant
pathophysiologies. Data suggest that multiple comorbidities (eg, obesity, hypertension, diabetes,
chronic kidney disease) lead to systemic inflammation, widespread endothelial dysfunction, cardiac
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 6/15
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
microvascular dysfunction, and, ultimately, molecular changes in the heart that cause increased
myocardial fibrosis and ventricular stiffening. Thus, although HFrEF is typically associated with primary
myocardial injury, HFpEF may be associated with secondary myocardial injury due to abnormalities in
the periphery.
Heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF)
HF with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF) is defined as an LV ejection fraction of 41 to 49%. It is
unclear whether this group is a distinct population or consists of a mixture of patients with either HFpEF
or HFrEF.
Heart failure with improved ejection fraction (HFimpEF)
Patients with HF whose LV ejection fraction has improved by more than an absolute of 10% from a prior
value and also measures over 40% are categorized as having HFimpEF.
RV failure
Right ventricular failure most commonly occurs as a consequence of or in tandem with left ventricular
failure. Isolated right heart failure is observed much less commonly. In heart failure that involves right
ventricular dysfunction (see Right Heart Failure), systemic venous pressure increases, causing fluid
extravasation and consequent edema, primarily in dependent tissues (feet and ankles of ambulatory
patients) and abdominal viscera. The liver is most severely affected, but the stomach and intestine also
become congested; fluid accumulation in the peritoneal cavity (ascites) can occur. RV failure commonly
causes moderate hepatic dysfunction, with usually modest increases in conjugated and unconjugated
bilirubin, prothrombin time (PT), and hepatic enzymes (particularly alkaline phosphatase and gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase [GGT]). The impaired liver breaks down less aldosterone, further contributing
to fluid accumulation. Chronic venous congestion in the viscera can cause anorexia, malabsorption of
nutrients and medications, protein-losing enteropathy (characterized by diarrhea and marked
hypoalbuminemia), chronic gastrointestinal blood loss, and rarely ischemic bowel infarction.
Responses to heart failure
Myocardial response
When left ventricular contractility is impaired, as is the case in HRrEF, a higher preload is required to
maintain cardiac output. As a result, the ventricles are remodeled over time. During remodelling, the LV
becomes less ovoid and more spherical, dilates, and hypertrophies; the RV dilates and may
hypertrophy. Initially compensatory, remodelling ultimately is associated with adverse outcomes
because the changes eventually increase diastolic stiffness and wall tension (ie, diastolic dysfunction
develops), compromising cardiac performance, especially during physical stress. Increased wall stress
raises oxygen demand and accelerates apoptosis (programmed cell death) of myocardial cells. Dilation
of the ventricles can also cause mitral or tricuspid valve regurgitation (due to annular dilation) with
further increases in end-diastolic volumes.
Hemodynamic response
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 7/15
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
With reduced cardiac output, oxygen delivery to the tissues is maintained by increasing oxygen
extraction from the blood and sometimes shifting the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (see figure
Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve) to the right to favor oxygen release.
Reduced cardiac output with lower systemic blood pressure activates arterial baroreflexes, increasing
sympathetic tone and decreasing parasympathetic tone. As a result, heart rate and myocardial
contractility increase, arterioles in selected vascular beds constrict, venoconstriction occurs, and sodium
and water are retained. These changes compensate for reduced ventricular performance and help
maintain hemodynamic homeostasis in the early stages of heart failure. However, these compensatory
changes increase cardiac work, preload, and afterload; reduce coronary and renal perfusion; cause fluid
accumulation resulting in congestion; increase potassium excretion; and may cause cardiomyocyte
necrosis and arrhythmias.
Renal response
As cardiac function deteriorates, renal blood flow decreases due to low cardiac output. In addition, renal
venous pressures increase, leading to renal venous congestion. These changes result in a decrease in
glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and blood flow within the kidneys is redistributed. The filtration fraction
and filtered sodium decrease, but tubular resorption increases, leading to sodium and water retention.
Blood flow is further redistributed away from the kidneys during exercise, but renal blood flow
improves during rest.
Decreased perfusion of the kidneys (and possibly decreased arterial systolic stretch secondary to
declining ventricular function) activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, increasing sodium
and water retention and renal and peripheral vascular tone. These effects are amplified by the intense
sympathetic activation accompanying heart failure.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) system causes a cascade
of potentially deleterious long-term effects. Angiotensin II worsens heart failure by causing
vasoconstriction, including efferent renal vasoconstriction, and by increasing aldosterone production,
which enhances sodium reabsorption in the distal nephron and also causes myocardial and vascular
collagen deposition and fibrosis. Angiotensin II increases norepinephrine release, stimulates release of
vasopressin, and triggers apoptosis. Angiotensin II may be involved in vascular and myocardial
hypertrophy, thus contributing to the remodeling of the heart and peripheral vasculature, potentially
worsening heart failure. Aldosterone can be synthesized in the heart and vasculature independently of
angiotensin II (perhaps mediated by corticotropin, nitric oxide, free radicals, and other stimuli) and may
have deleterious effects in these organs.
Heart failure that causes progressive renal dysfunction (including renal dysfunction caused by
medications used to treat HF) contributes to worsening HF and has been termed the cardiorenal
syndrome.
Neurohumoral response
In conditions of stress, neurohumoral responses help increase heart function and maintain blood
pressure and organ perfusion. Chronic activation of these responses is detrimental to the normal
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 8/15
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
balance between myocardial-stimulating and vasoconstricting hormones and between myocardial-
relaxing and vasodilating hormones.
The heart contains many neurohumoral receptors (alpha-1, beta-1, beta-2, beta-3, angiotensin II type 1
[AT1] and type 2 [AT2], muscarinic, endothelin, serotonin, adenosine, cytokine, natriuretic peptides); the
roles of all of these receptors are not fully defined. In patients with heart failure, beta-1 receptors (which
constitute 70% of cardiac beta receptors) are downregulated, probably in response to intense
sympathetic activation. The result of downregulation is impaired myocyte contractility and increased
heart rate.
Plasma norepinephrine levels are increased, largely reflecting sympathetic nerve stimulation as plasma
epinephrine levels are not increased. Detrimental effects include vasoconstriction with increased
preload and afterload, direct myocardial damage including apoptosis, reduced renal blood flow, and
activation of other neurohumoral systems, including the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-vasopressin
system.
Vasopressin is released in response to a fall in blood pressure via various neurohormonal stimuli.
Increased vasopressin decreases renal excretion of free water, possibly contributing to hyponatremia in
heart failure. Vasopressin levels in patients with HF and normal blood pressure vary.
Atrial natriuretic peptide is released in response to increased atrial volume and pressure; brain (B-type)
natriuretic peptide (BNP) is released from the ventricle in response to ventricular stretching. These
peptides enhance renal excretion of sodium; however, in patients with HF, the effect is blunted by
decreased renal perfusion pressure, receptor downregulation, and perhaps enhanced enzymatic
degradation. In addition, elevated levels of natriuretic peptides exert a counter-regulatory effect on the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and catecholamine stimulation.
Because endothelial dysfunction occurs in HF, fewer endogenous vasodilators (eg, nitric oxide,
prostaglandins) are produced, and more endogenous vasoconstrictors (eg, endothelin) are produced,
thus increasing afterload.
The failing heart and other organs produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha. This cytokine increases
catabolism and is possibly responsible for cardiac cachexia (loss of lean tissue ≥ 10%), which may
accompany severely symptomatic HF, and for other detrimental changes. The failing heart also
undergoes metabolic changes with increased free fatty acid utilization and decreased glucose
utilization; these changes may become therapeutic targets.
Changes with aging
Age-related changes in the heart and cardiovascular system lower the threshold for expression of heart
failure. Interstitial collagen within the myocardium increases, the myocardium stiffens, and myocardial
relaxation is prolonged. These changes lead to a significant reduction in diastolic left ventricular
function, even in healthy older adults. Modest decline in systolic function also occurs with aging. An age-
related decrease in myocardial and vascular responsiveness to beta-adrenergic stimulation further
impairs the ability of the cardiovascular system to respond to increased work demands.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 9/15
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
As a result of these changes, peak exercise capacity decreases significantly (approximately 8%/decade
after age 30 years), and cardiac output at peak exercise decreases more modestly. This decline can be
slowed by regular physical exercise. Thus, older patients are more prone than are younger ones to
develop HF symptoms in response to the stress of systemic disorders or relatively modest
cardiovascular insults. Stressors include infections (particularly pneumonia), hyperthyroidism, anemia,
hypertension, myocardial ischemia, hypoxia, hyperthermia, renal failure, perioperative IV fluid loads,
nonadherence to medication regimens or to low-salt diets, and use of certain medications (particularly
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]).
Pathophysiology references
1. Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal Definition and Classification of Heart Failure: A
Report of the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of
Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of
Heart Failure. J Card Fail. Published online March 1, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.cardfail.2021.01.022
2. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management
of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023
Apr 18;81(15):1551. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.03.002.]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022;79(17):e263-e421.
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2021.12.012
3. Campbell P, Rutten FH, Lee MM, Hawkins NM, Petrie MC. Heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction: everything the clinician needs to know [published correction appears in Lancet. 2024 Mar
16;403(10431):1026. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(24)00494-X.]. Lancet. 2024;403(10431):1083-1092.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(23)02756-3
Etiology of Heart Failure
Both cardiac and systemic factors can impair cardiac performance and cause or aggravate heart failure
(see table Causes of Heart Failure).
TABLE
Causes of Heart Failure
Type Examples
Cardiac
Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial damage
Myocarditis
Some chemotherapy agents
Valvular disorders Aortic stenosis
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 10/15
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Type Examples
Mitral regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation
Bradyarrhythmias
Arrhythmias
Tachyarrhythmias
Atrioventricular block
Conduction defects
Left bundle branch block
Reduced substrate availability (eg, of free
Ischemia
fatty acids or glucose)
Amyloidosis
Infiltrative or matrix disorders Chronic fibrosis (eg, systemic sclerosis)
Hemochromatosis
Systemic
Anemia
Disorders that increase demand for
Hyperthyroidism
cardiac output
Paget disease
Aortic stenosis
Disorders that increase resistance to
output (afterload)
Hypertension
LV failure characteristically develops in ischemic heart disease, hypertension, mitral regurgitation,
aortic regurgitation, aortic stenosis, most forms of cardiomyopathy, and congenital heart disorders (eg,
ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus with large shunts).
RV failure is most commonly caused by previous LV failure (which increases pulmonary venous
pressure and leads to pulmonary hypertension, thus overloading the RV) or by a severe lung disorder (in
which case it is called cor pulmonale). Other causes are multiple pulmonary emboli, RV infarction,
pulmonary arterial hypertension, tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid stenosis, mitral stenosis, pulmonary
artery stenosis, pulmonic valve stenosis, pulmonary venous occlusive disease, arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy, or congenital disorders such as Ebstein anomaly or Eisenmenger
syndrome. Some conditions mimic RV failure, except cardiac function may be normal; they include
volume overload and increased systemic venous pressure in polycythemia or overtransfusion, acute
kidney injury with retention of sodium and water, obstruction of either vena cava, and hypoproteinemia
due to any cause resulting in low plasma oncotic pressure and peripheral edema.
Biventricular failure results from disorders that affect the whole myocardium (eg, viral myocarditis,
amyloidosis, Chagas disease) or long-standing LV failure causing RV failure.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 11/15
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
High-output HF results from a persistently high cardiac output, which may eventually result in an
inability of a normal heart to maintain adequate output. Conditions that may increase cardiac output
include severe anemia, end-stage liver disease, beriberi, thyrotoxicosis, advanced Paget disease,
arteriovenous fistula, and persistent tachycardia.
Cardiomyopathy is a general term indicating disease of the myocardium. Most commonly, the term
refers to a primary disorder of the ventricular myocardium that is not caused by congenital anatomic
defects; valvular, systemic, or pulmonary vascular disorders; isolated pericardial, nodal, or conduction
system disorders; or epicardial coronary artery disease (CAD). The term is sometimes used to reflect
etiology (eg, ischemic vs hypertensive cardiomyopathy). Cardiomyopathy does not always lead to
symptomatic HF. It is often idiopathic and is classified as dilated, congestive, hypertrophic, infiltrative-
restrictive, or apical-ballooning cardiomyopathy (also known as takotsubo or stress cardiomyopathy).
Staging of Heart Failure
International consensus defines the staging system for heart failure (HF) to highlight the need for HF
prevention (1, 2):
A: High risk of HF but no structural or functional cardiac abnormalities or symptoms
B: Structural or functional cardiac abnormalities but no symptoms of HF
C: Structural heart disease with symptoms of HF
D: Refractory HF requiring advanced therapies (eg, mechanical circulatory support, cardiac
transplantation) or palliative care
Clinical severity (or functional classification) varies significantly and is usually classified according to the
New York Heart Association (NYHA) system (see table NYHA Functional Classification of Heart Failure);
the examples of ordinary activity may be modified for older, debilitated patients. Because HF has such a
broad range of severity, some experts subdivide NYHA class III into IIIA or IIIB (3, 4). Class IIIB is typically
reserved for those patients who recently had a heart failure exacerbation, although the definition is not
standardized.
TABLE
New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classification of
Heart Failure
NYHA Class Definition Limitation Example
I Ordinary physical None Can complete any
activity does not activity requiring ≥
cause undue 7 METs:
fatigue, dyspnea, or
Carry > 11 kg
palpitations
(24 pounds) up
stairs
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 12/15
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
NYHA Class Definition Limitation Example
Carry load
weighing 23 kg
(50 pounds)
Shovel snow
Spade soil
Ski
Play squash,
handball, or
basketball
Jog or walk ≥
6.9 km/hour (≥
4.3 mph)
Can complete
activity requiring ≥
5 but ≤ 7 METs:
Vigorous sexual
activity
Comfortable at
rest; ordinary Garden
physical activity Roller skate
II causes fatigue, Mild
Brisk walking
dyspnea,
up to 7
palpitations, or
km/hour (4.4
angina
mph) on level
ground
Carry an 11 kg
(24-pound)
load up stairs
III Comfortable at Moderate Can complete
rest; less than activity requiring ≥
ordinary physical 2 and ≤ 5 METs:
activity causes
Shower or
fatigue, dyspnea,
dress while
palpitations, or
standing
angina
Moderate
IIIa: Without recent household
HF exacerbation or cleaning (eg,
recent resting washing
dyspnea windows,
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 13/15
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
NYHA Class Definition Limitation Example
sweeping,
IIIb: With recent HF
vacuuming,
exacerbation or
kitchen
recent resting
activities)
dyspnea
Play golf
Walk up to 5.4
km/hour (3.4
mph) on level
ground
Climb stairs,
slowly
Symptoms with all
activities
Symptomatic rest;
Cannot complete
any physical activity
IV Severe
any activity
increases
requiring ≥ 2 METs
discomfort
(all activities listed
above)
HF = heart failure, MET = metabolic equivalent of task, a measure of how much energy is
expended compared to remaining at rest; mph = mile per hour.
Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the
Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction
appears in J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Apr 18;81(15):1551. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2023.03.002.]. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2022;79(17):e263-e421. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2021.12.012; Yancy CW, Jessup M,
Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: executive
summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart
Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128(16):1810-1852.
doi:10.1161/CIR.0b013e31829e8807; and Dolgin M, Association NYH, Fox AC, Gorlin R, Levin
RI, New York Heart Association. Criteria Committee. Nomenclature and criteria for diagnosis of
diseases of the heart and great vessels. 9th ed. Boston, MA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins;
March 1, 1994.
MET values for activities are from:Herrmann SD, Willis EA, Ainsworth BE, et al. 2024 Adult
Compendium of Physical Activities: A third update of the energy costs of human activities. J
Sport Health Sci. 2024;13(1):6-12. doi:10.1016/j.jshs.2023.10.010
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 14/15
--- Страница 15 ---
22/01/2026, 14:46 Overview of Heart Failure - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Staging references
1. Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal Definition and Classification of Heart Failure: A
Report of the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of
Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of
Heart Failure. J Card Fail. Published online March 1, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.cardfail.2021.01.022
2. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management
of Heart Failure: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032. doi:
10.1161/CIR.0000000000001062
3. Levy WC, Mozaffarian D, Linker DT, et al. The Seattle Heart Failure Model: prediction of survival
in heart failure. Circulation. 2006;113(11):1424-1433. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.584102
4. Thibodeau JT, Mishkin JD, Patel PC, Mammen PP, Markham DW, Drazner MH. IIIB or not IIIB: a
previously unanswered question. J Card Fail. 2012;18(5):367-372. doi:10.1016/j.cardfail.2012.01.016
Key Points
Heart failure is the inability the heart to provide tissues with adequate blood for
metabolic needs.
Heart failure most commonly affects the left ventricle, but can involve the right or both
ventricles.
Heart failure is classified based on the left ventricular ejection fraction into heart failure
with reduced, minimally reduced, preserved, or improved ejection fraction.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/heart-failure/overview-of-heart-failure 15/15
