=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:51.975745",
  "file_size_bytes": 198211,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary
Syndromes
By Ranya N. Sweis, MD, MS, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine;
Arif Jivan, MD, PhD, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2024
Revascularization is the restoration of blood supply to ischemic myocardium in an effort to limit ongoing
damage, reduce ventricular irritability, and improve short-term and long-term outcomes in patients with
acute coronary syndromes. Modes of revascularization include:
Thrombolysis with fibrinolytic drugs
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), with or without stent placement
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
The use, timing, and modality of revascularization depend on which acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is
present, timing of presentation, extent and location of anatomic lesions, and availability of personnel
and facilities (see figure Approach to Acute Coronary Syndromes—1).
Unstable Angina and Non–ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial
Infarction
Immediate reperfusion is not as urgent in patients with uncomplicated non–ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), in whom a completely occluded infarct-related artery at presentation is
uncommon, or in patients with unstable angina who respond to medical therapy. Such patients typically
undergo angiography within the first 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization to identify coronary lesions
requiring PCI or CABG.
A noninterventional approach and a trial of medical management are used for patients in whom
angiography demonstrates
Only a small area of myocardium at risk
Lesion morphology not amenable to PCI
Anatomically insignificant disease (< 50% coronary stenosis)
Significant left main disease in patients who are not candidates for CABG
Further, angiography or PCI should be deferred in favor of medical management for patients with a high
risk of procedure-related morbidity or mortality.
 1/4

 Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
By contrast, patients with persistent chest pain despite maximal medical therapy or complications (eg,
markedly elevated cardiac biomarkers, presence of cardiogenic shock, acute mitral regurgitation,
ventricular septal defect, unstable arrhythmias) should proceed directly to the cardiac catheterization
laboratory to identify coronary lesions requiring PCI or CABG.
As in patients with stable angina, CABG has historically been preferred over PCI for patients with left
main or left main equivalent disease (although the data supporting this practice are changing) and for
those with left ventricular dysfunction or diabetes. CABG must also be considered when PCI is
unsuccessful, cannot be used (eg, in lesions that are long or near bifurcation points), or causes acute
coronary artery dissection.
Fibrinolytics are not indicated for unstable angina or NSTEMI. Risk outweighs potential benefit.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Score for Unstable Angina Non ST
Elevation Myocardial Infarction
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Emergency PCI is the preferred treatment of ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) when
available in a timely fashion (door to balloon-inflation time < 90 minutes) by an experienced operator
(1). Indications for urgent PCI later in the course of STEMI include hemodynamic instability, malignant
arrhythmias requiring transvenous pacing or repeated cardioversion, and age > 75 years. If the lesions
necessitate CABG, there is significant mortality and a higher morbidity rate.
If there is likely to be a significant delay in availability of PCI, thrombolysis should be done for STEMI
patients meeting criteria (see table Fibrinolytic Therapy for STEMI). Reperfusion using fibrinolytics is
most effective if given in the first few minutes to hours after onset of myocardial infarction. The earlier a
fibrinolytic is begun, the better. The goal is a door-to-needle time of 30 to 60 minutes. Greatest benefit
occurs within 3 hours, but the drugs may be effective up to 12 hours. Used with aspirin, fibrinolytics
reduce hospital mortality rate by 30 to 50% and improve ventricular function. Prehospital use of
fibrinolytics by trained paramedics can significantly reduce time to treatment and should be considered
in situations in which PCI within 90 minutes is not possible, particularly in patients presenting within 3
hours of symptom onset.
Regardless, most patients who undergo thrombolysis will ultimately require transfer to a PCI-capable
facility for elective angiography and PCI as necessary before discharge. PCI should be considered after
fibrinolytics if chest pain or ST-segment elevation persists ≥ 60 minutes after initiation of fibrinolytics or
if pain and ST-segment elevation recur, but only if PCI can be initiated < 90 minutes after onset of
recurrence. If PCI is unavailable, fibrinolytics can be repeated.
Characteristics and selection of fibrinolytic drugs are discussed elsewhere.
 2/4

 Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
TABLE
Fibrinolytic Therapy for STEMI
Criteria Specifics
ST-segment elevation in ≥ 2 contiguous
leads
Typical symptoms and left bundle
ECG criteria*
branch block not known to be old
Strictly posterior MI (large R wave in V1
and ST depression in V1–V4
Aortic dissection
Previous hemorrhagic stroke (at any
time)
Previous ischemic stroke within 1 year
Absolute contraindications
Active internal bleeding (not menses)
Intracranial tumor
Pericarditis
Blood pressure > 180/110 mm Hg after
initial antihypertensive therapy
Trauma or major surgery within 4 weeks
Active peptic ulcer
Relative contraindications
Pregnancy
Bleeding diathesis
Noncompressible vascular puncture
Current anticoagulation (INR > 2)
* Patients presenting in the hyperacute phase of MI with giant T waves do not meet current
criteria for fibrinolytics; ECG is repeated in 20 to 30 minutes to see if ST-segment elevation
has developed.
General reference
1. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al: 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am
Coll Cardiol 79(2):e21–e129, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2021.09.006
 3/4

 Overview of Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 4/4
