=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:12.915103",
  "file_size_bytes": 308590,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Overview of Anxiety Disorders
By John W. Barnhill, MD, New York-Presbyterian Hospital
Reviewed By Mark Zimmerman, MD, South County Psychiatry
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2023 | Modified Jan 2024
Anxiety disorders are characterized by persistent and excessive fear and
anxiety and the dysfunctional behavioral changes a patient may use to mitigate
these feelings. Anxiety disorders are differentiated from one another based on
the specific objects or situations that induce the fear, anxiety, and associated
behavioral changes.
Everyone periodically experiences fear and anxiety.
Fear is an emotional, physical, and behavioral response to an immediately recognizable external threat
(eg, an intruder, a car spinning on ice).
Anxiety is a distressing, unpleasant emotional state of nervousness and uneasiness; its causes are less
clear. Anxiety is less tied to the exact timing of a threat; it can be anticipatory before a threat, persist
after a threat has passed, or occur without an identifiable threat.
People often experience both fear and anxiety as changes in their body (eg, sweating, nausea) and their
behaviors (eg, avoidance, anger). Often, people are aware of these physical and behavioral changes
without clearly identifying that they are anxious or fearful.
Adaptive anxiety can help motivate people to prepare, practice, and rehearse; it can also encourage
appropriate caution in potentially dangerous situations. When anxiety causes dysfunction and undue
distress, however, it is considered maladaptive and, thus, a psychiatric disorder.
Anxiety disorders are more common than any other class of psychiatric disorder, with about one third
of people meeting criteria for an anxiety disorder at some point in their lifetime (1, 2). Anxiety disorders
tend to be underdiagnosed, however, and can be associated with suicidal thoughts and suicide
attempts.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR) lists the
various anxiety disorders in order of the typical age of onset (3):
Separation anxiety disorder
Selective mutism
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 1/10
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Specific phobia (animal, natural environment, blood-injection injury, situational)
Social anxiety disorder
Panic disorder
Agoraphobia
Generalized anxiety disorder
Substance-induced/medication-induced anxiety disorder
Anxiety due to another medical condition
Other specified anxiety disorder (applies when patient has significant symptoms but does
not meet criteria for any specific anxiety disorder)
Separation anxiety and selective mutism tend to arise during childhood, whereas the other disorders
listed above generally develop in adulthood.
Substance-induced/medication-induced anxiety disorder and anxiety due to another medical
condition should always be considered when people present with significant anxiety.
Other disorders that often present with prominent anxiety include acute stress disorder, adjustment
disorders, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Because they are deemed to arise out of traumatic
or stressful experiences, they are grouped separately in the DSM-5-TR.
Anxiety disorders tend to be highly comorbid with other medical and psychiatric conditions. Depression,
substance use disorders, personality disorders, and other anxiety disorders are particularly common
comorbidities, as are cardiovascular disease, asthma, migraines, and arthritis. Because anxiety
disorders often precede other psychiatric comorbidities, early and effective treatment of the anxiety
disorder can prevent or mitigate their development.
General references
1. Bandelow B, Michaelis S: Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st century. Dialogues Clin
Neurosci 17(3):327-335, 2015. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2015.17.3/bbandelow
2. Penninx BW, Pine DS, Holmes EA, et al: Anxiety disorders. Lancet 97(10277):914-927, 2021. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00359-7
3. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR).
American Psychiatric Association Publishing, Washington, DC, pp 215-262.
Etiology of Anxiety Disorders
There is no single gene or psychological cause for anxiety disorders, but they do seem to develop in the
context of typical biopsychosocial factors. Anxiety disorders tend to run in families, and they do so
through at least 2 mechanisms (1):
A childhood trait of "behavioral inhibition" appears to be somewhat inherited, and that trait
is associated with an increased risk of anxiety disorders in adolescence.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 2/10
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Social fears and avoidance can be transmitted to children through parental modeling
and/or early traumatic experiences that might include childhood maltreatment or medical
illnesses (eg, asthma). It has been hypothesized that these experiences and genetic
vulnerabilities prime some children to be unusually attentive to their own physical and
emotional reactions to stress, which can then lead to panic disorder and social anxiety
disorder.
Many people develop an anxiety disorder, however, without an identifiable antecedent trigger. For
example, most people with a snake phobia have never been bitten by a snake and do not report a
characteristic traumatic experience. Anxiety can also be a response to environmental and social
stressors during adulthood, such as the ending of a significant relationship or exposure to a life-
threatening disaster, though most people who experience such stressors do not go on to develop an
anxiety disorder.
Multiple neurotransmitters are involved in the development of anxiety disorders. The 2 predominant
neurotransmitters—GABA and glutamate—play a key role, as do other neurotransmitters like serotonin,
norepinephrine, and dopamine. These neurotransmitters play an important role in influencing
medication selection.
Some medical disorders can directly cause anxiety. These include asthma, cardiac arrhythmias, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), heart failure, hyperthyroidism, Cushing syndrome, and
pheochromocytoma.
The medications used to treat some medical disorders can also induce anxiety as a symptom. These
include
Asthma (albuterol, corticosteroids, theophylline)
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (amphetamines and other stimulants)
Hyperthyroidism (levothyroxine, liothyronine)
Seasonal allergies (antihistamines and decongestants)
Seizure disorders (phenytoin)
Parkinson disease (levodopa)
In addition, a variety of substances and illicit drugs can directly induce anxiety, including caffeine,
cocaine, and MDMA (ecstasy). Some drugs that are generally used to induce relaxation can also cause
anxiety. Cannabis (marijuana) induces anxiety in some people, either directly or through an adulterant
such as phencyclidine (PCP). Withdrawal from alcohol, sedatives, and some other drugs can also cause
anxiety.
COVID-19–related anxiety
The COVID-19 pandemic was associated with surges in rates of depression and anxiety in people who
had not been infected (2). Such psychological reactions may have been exacerbations of underlying
issues, but the symptoms are often intensified by media exposure, economic hardship, uncertainty
regarding the future, fears of infection (for themselves and loved ones), loss of familiar supports (eg,
friends, employment), and behavioral restrictions (eg, masks, social distancing).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 3/10
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptomatic COVID-19 infection is also associated with increased anxiety (3). The triggers for this
increased anxiety can be physiologic (eg, shortness of breath); psychological (eg, immediate fears of
death); social (eg, isolation from loved ones); and pharmacologic (eg, corticosteroids are often used in
treatment of COVID-19). In addition, it has been hypothesized that COVID-19 induces a host immune
response that directly leads to neuropsychiatric symptoms (eg, anxiety, mood changes, neuromuscular
dysfunction); these neuropsychiatric reactions may be acute or part of a syndrome known as long
COVID. (See also COVID-Related Neuropsychiatric Manifestations.)
Etiology references
1. Juruena MF, Eror F, Cleare AJ, et al: The role of early life stress in HPA axis and anxiety. Adv Exp
Med Biol 1191:141-153, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_9
2. Shafran R, Rachman S, Whittal M, et al: Fear and anxiety in COVID-19: Preexisting anxiety
disorders. Cogn Behav Pract 28(4):459-467, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.cbpra.2021.03.003
3. Troyer EA, Kohn JN, Hong S: Are we facing a crashing wave of neuropsychiatric sequelae of
COVID-19? Neuropsychiatric symptoms and potential immunologic mechanisms. Brain Behav
Immun 87:34-39, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.04.027
Symptoms and Signs of Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety disorders tend to differ from usual and normal anxiety by being persistent (> 6 months),
excessive, debilitating, and uncomfortable.
Anxiety disorders can induce a broad range of physical symptoms, including (1):
Gastrointestinal: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Pulmonary: Shortness of breath, choking
Autonomic: Dizziness, faintness, sweats, hot and cold flashes
Cardiac: Palpitations, accelerated heart rate
Musculoskeletal: Muscle tension, chest pain or tightness
A panic or worry diary can be a useful tool for recording symptoms, both because retrospective anxiety
reports can be vague and because treatment strategies often depend on details.
Signs and symptoms reference
1. Craske MG, Stein MB: Anxiety. Lancet 388:3048-3059, 2016. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30381-6
Diagnosis of Anxiety Disorders
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR)
criteria
Diagnosis of a specific anxiety disorder is based on its characteristic symptoms and signs according to
DSM-5-TR. In general, an anxiety disorder may be suspected when the following apply (1):
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 4/10
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Anxiety is very distressing.
Anxiety interferes with functioning.
Anxiety does not stop spontaneously within a few days.
Other causes are not identified.
When diagnosing an anxiety disorder, it is important to rule out anxiety attributable to certain medical
conditions (eg, asthma, hyperthyroidism), and/or substances or medications (2). Furthermore, if
present, the clinician needs to assess the extent to which the medical disorder and/or substance is
actually implicated in the anxiety. As is true in all psychiatric assessments, a careful history is crucial to
accurate diagnosis.
If patients meet criteria for an anxiety disorder, and the clinician concludes that the symptoms are best
explained by the direct physiologic effects of a medication or illicit drug/substance, the patient is
deemed to have a substance-/medication-induced anxiety disorder. Similarly, if the significant anxiety is
deemed to be the direct physiologic result of another medical condition, the patient may be diagnosed
with anxiety disorder due to another medical condition.
As is true for almost all psychiatric conditions, there are no laboratory tests for anxiety disorders,
though laboratory tests may help identify medical conditions associated with the anxiety. Clinical
judgment is required before making the diagnosis. In addition to eliciting characteristic symptoms and
time course, the clinician must also evaluate whether the clinical situation meets the threshold for
causing clinically significant distress and/or dysfunction.
The different anxiety disorders can often be distinguished from one another based on the answers to 3
key questions:
What situations induce the fear and anxiety?
What thoughts are associated with the anxiety?
What avoidance strategies are used?
Cultural factors
Culture influences the expression, conceptualization, and treatment of all psychiatric conditions,
including anxiety disorders (3, 4). During the psychiatric assessment, it is important to look for ways in
which the anxiety symptoms might be affected by the surrounding political, economic, and legal
systems, as well as by specific issues related to migrant status, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status,
religion, spirituality, and family structures.
Patients may feel intimidated, embarrassed, or reluctant to discuss anxiety with anyone, much less
physicians, who may appear to belong to a different and potentially more privileged socioeconomic
group. Similarly, people who want to be "good patients" might not be upfront about psychiatric issues if
they suspect that their clinicians are too busy to address anything other than their most prominent
nonpsychiatric medical issue.
It is useful for the clinician to consider that different individuals or groups use different words to
describe distress. For example, people in many countries use the phrase "thinking too much" rather
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 5/10
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
than describing symptoms that match specific psychiatric criteria for disorders such as major
depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or generalized anxiety disorder (5).
It can also be useful to ask patients what they think is causing their problems. Not all patients believe
completely in the medical model, and, if tactfully asked, many patients might reluctantly mention that
they (or their relatives) believe their symptoms were induced by a religious or other mystical source (eg,
an "evil eye").
Eliciting such information improves the patient-clinician alliance, deepens the understanding of both the
patient and the presenting complaints, and improves the likelihood that the patient will be more
transparent and adherent going forward.
Diagnosis references
1. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition,Text Revision (DSM-5-TR).
American Psychiatric Association Publishing, Washington, DC, pp 215-221.
2. Craske MG, Stein MB: Anxiety. Lancet 388:3048-3059, 2016. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30381-6
3. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR),
Cultural Concepts of Distress. American Psychiatric Association Publishing, Washington, DC, pp
872-880.
4. Lewis-Fernández R, Aggarwal NK, Lam PC, et al: Feasibility, acceptability and clinical utility of the
Cultural Formulation Interview: Mixed-methods results from the DSM-5 international field trial. Br J
Psychiatry 210(4):290-297, 2017. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.116.193862
5. Kaiser BN , Haroz EE, Kohrt BA, et al: "Thinking too much": A systematic review of a common
idiom of distress. Soc Sci Med 147:170-183, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.10.044
Treatment of Anxiety Disorders
Psychoeducation
Relaxation techniques
Psychotherapies, such as cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy (CBT)
Pharmacotherapy (benzodiazepines, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs])
The following general principles are important to take into consideration when treating anxiety
disorders:
A variety of interventions are effective for managing anxiety disorders.
Most patients can be managed successfully in primary care settings.
Accurate identification of the anxiety disorder and pertinent comorbidities is crucial.
Treatment of comorbid medical conditions that can contribute to anxiety (eg, asthma).
Co-occurring substance use disorders should generally be treated concomitantly with the
anxiety disorder. It should be recognized that the substance is often partly being used to
reduce anxiety, and withdrawal can induce additional anxiety.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 6/10
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Lifestyle modifications such as obtaining adequate exercise and sleep (1) and limiting
caffeine intake may significantly reduce anxiety symptoms.
Treatment recommendations are influenced by patient preferences and access to mental
health care professionals.
Psychotherapy and medications are effective for most anxiety disorders, particularly when used
together (2, 3).
Psychoeducation and relaxation techniques
Psychoeducation is typically fundamental to the treatment of anxiety disorders. It can feel liberating for
the patient to understand how a sometimes bewildering array of symptoms and behaviors can be
conceptualized into a diagnosis. Education also provides a cognitive structure to help patients pursue a
treatment that may feel uncomfortable.
Relaxation techniques should be taught early in the treatment. These techniques are useful both
because fear and anxiety are fundamental to anxiety disorders and because the treatment can
transiently intensify the disabling thoughts and feelings. Without a tool for controlling anxiety, many
patients will not adhere to treatment. Relaxation techniques may include muscle relaxation, breathing
management, yoga, hypnosis, and/or meditation, but patient preference is important in determining the
specific approach. Relaxation techniques can be briefly described and then "prescribed" as homework.
Adherence and effectiveness are more likely to be optimized if the clinician periodically demonstrates
the techniques (eg, slow, steady breathing) with enthusiasm.
Psychotherapies
Various psychotherapies are equally efficacious for most psychiatric disorders. This equivalency appears
to be related to so-called nonspecific factors, which include the personal characteristics of the therapist
and a positive therapeutic climate that allows the patient to effectively engage in the talk therapy and
remain adherent with agreed-upon practices and medications.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) has the most robust evidence as a psychosocial treatment for
anxiety disorders (4). Psychoeducation and relaxation techniques should be introduced early in CBT.
CBT involves both cognitive restructuring and exposure therapy. Cognitive restructuring begins with
the idea that patients with anxiety disorders overestimate the danger (catastrophize) and
underestimate their ability to deal with the danger. These inaccurate thoughts and antecedent triggers
are clarified during treatment. Often, the pattern of anxiety can be neatly laid into a characteristic cycle
of triggers, behaviors, and anxiety. As this cycle is clarified, patients are taught to recognize and confront
their inaccurate thoughts (ie, cognitive restructuring).
CBT also focuses on the behavioral elements of the anxiety disorder. Typically, patients with anxiety
disorders respond to perceived danger with a "fight-or-flight" response. Some patients with prominent
anxiety are able to "fight" their anxiety, often with a counter-phobic response (eg, an actor with
prominent social anxiety), but most respond with avoidance. Exposure therapy aims to identify the
avoidance behavior and then present the patient with gradually intensifying opportunities to be safely
exposed to the fearful trigger, gradually desensitizing the patient.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 7/10
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Other psychotherapies used for treatment of anxiety disorders combine aspects of CBT, relaxation,
and mindfulness along with other strategies that appear to be helpful. These treatments include
mindfulness-based stress reduction, hypnosis, panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy,
interpersonal therapy, and supportive psychotherapy:
Mindfulness-based stress reduction is a standardized program in which groups meet for
8 consecutive weeks; sessions feature sitting and walking meditation, yoga, and mindful
relaxation techniques. There is also a daily home practice to reinforce the principles
practiced during the 2.5-hour sessions (5). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
combines these mindfulness elements with CBT methods such as psychoeducation and
cognitive restructuring.
Hypnosis is used to teach management of the interaction between mental anxiety and
physical stress such as muscle tension, increase in respiratory and heart rate, and sweating.
Mental anxiety and physical stress tend to reinforce each other, while hypnotic suggestions
to imagine being in a safe and comfortable place coupled with visualization of means of
successful stress management can reduce anxiety symptoms rapidly while teaching a
coping skill (6).
Panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy is a structured, time-limited
psychotherapy that shares features with other interventions, though the sessions tend to
focus on the stressors, feelings, and emotional meanings of panic attacks (7).
Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) is a structured, time-limited psychotherapy that
addresses current problems and relationships. IPT focuses on 1 or more of 4 areas:
relationship conflicts, life changes, grief or loss, and problems with relationships. Most
often used to treat depression, IPT appears to be well-tolerated and effective for several
anxiety disorders (8). While CBT focuses on cognitions and behaviors, IPT focuses on
feelings that develop in the context of interpersonal situations.
Supportive psychotherapy aims to support the patient's healthy defenses and healthy
behaviors through empathy, validation, and nonjudgmental listening. Supportive
techniques tend to improve the therapeutic alliance and reduce treatment nonadherence.
Supportive psychotherapy can be therapeutic by itself and can also be a fundamental part
of other psychotherapies.
Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapy is typically helpful in the management of anxiety disorders, especially when used in
conjunction with any of the above psychotherapeutic techniques. Antidepressants and benzodiazepines
are the 2 medication classes with the strongest evidence base, though there is also a role for
nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytics (such as buspirone) and atypical antipsychotics (9).
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are generally considered first-line based on their
efficacy and safety profiles. These "antidepressant" medications address the symptoms of the anxiety
disorders regardless of whether there is a comorbid depressive disorder.
SSRI antidepressants are generally started at the lowest available dose to minimize adverse effects.
Patients with anxiety may be sensitive to bodily changes and may discontinue treatment if they
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 8/10
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
experience adverse effects early on. Once the patient has tolerated the initial dose, the antidepressant
can be gradually increased until a therapeutic dose or therapeutic effect is reached. A positive clinical
effect may occur at any time but often takes 6 or more weeks to achieve.
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) , particularly duloxetine and venlafaxine, have
also demonstrated safety and efficacy for the treatment of anxiety disorders.
Benzodiazepines may be used for acute relief of anxiety but can create dependence and a desire for
increasing levels that limit their benefit/risk ratio for chronic use (10). They are often used in conjunction
with an antidepressant and psychotherapy. The benzodiazepine can often be tapered once the anxiety
symptoms have improved.
Treatment of comorbidities
When present, comorbid substance use disorders and other psychiatric conditions must also be
appropriately managed.
Comorbid substance use disorders are often not spontaneously reported (11). Substances such as
alcohol, marijuana, and benzodiazepines are often used to self-medicate by those with anxiety
disorders. Patients may be reluctant to give up these substances until they trust that the clinician has a
viable alternative treatment. Self-medication often leads to a vicious cycle. For example, the alcohol use
that quickly reduces anxiety may be followed by rebound anxiety, followed by an increased urgency to
self-medicate.
Comorbid bipolar disorder can cause specific management difficulties. Many people with bipolar
disorder are initially misdiagnosed, particularly because they often have far more periods of depression
than mania. Treatment with an antidepressant medication may be an appropriate first-line treatment
for an anxiety disorder with comorbid major depression. However, for an individual with both anxiety
and a bipolar disorder, that same medication choice can trigger a manic episode consisting of
intensified anxiety and irritability. A missed bipolar disorder can result in decades of inappropriate
treatments.
Comorbid medical disorders can also be challenging to manage. For example, asthma can
physiologically cause anxiety, but so can some of the medications used to treat asthma. Anxiety can
contribute to an asthma exacerbation, and fears of an asthma exacerbation can lead to avoidance
behaviors (eg, diminished activity, medication nonadherence) that in turn can exacerbate asthma and
lead to a diminished quality of life.
Treatment references
1. Chellappa SL, Aeschbach D: Sleep and anxiety: From mechanisms to interventions. Sleep Med
Rev61:101583, 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2021.101583
2. Bandelow B, Michaelis S, Wedekind D: Treatment of anxiety disorders. Dialogues Clin Neurosci
19(2):93-107, 2017. doi: 10.31887/DCNS.2017.19.2/bbandelow
3. Cuijpers P, Sijbrandij M, Koole SL, et al: Adding psychotherapy to antidepressant medication in
depression and anxiety disorders: a meta-analysis. World Psychiatry, 13(1), 56-67, 2014.doi:
10.1002/wps.20089
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 9/10
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 13:55 Overview of Anxiety Disorders - Psychiatric Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
4. Szuhany KL, Simon NM: Anxiety disorders: A review. JAMA 328(24):2431-2445, 2022. doi:
10.1001/jama.2022.22744
5. Haller H, Breilmann P, Schröter, M. et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of acceptance-
and mindfulness-based interventions for DSM-5 anxiety disorders. Sci Rep 11(1):20385, 2021. doi:
10.1038/s41598-021-99882-w
6. Valentine KE, Milling LS, Clark LJ, et al: The efficacy of hypnosis as a treatment for anxiety: A
meta-analysis. Int J Clin Exp Hyposis 67(3)336-363, 2019. doi: 10.1080/00207144.2019.1613863
7. Barber JP, Milrod B, Gallop R, et al: Processes of therapeutic change: Results from the Cornell-
Penn Study of Psychotherapies for Panic Disorder. J Couns Psychol 67(2):222-231, 2020. doi:
10.1037/cou0000417
8. Markowitz JC, Milrod B, Luyten P, et al: Mentalizing in interpersonal psychotherapy. Am J
Psychother 72(4):95-100. 2019. doi: 10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.20190021
9. Slee A, Nazareth I, Bondaronek P, et al: Pharmacological treatments for generalised anxiety
disorder: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet 2019393(10173):768-777. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31793-8
10. Balon R, Starcevic V: Role of benzodiazepines in anxiety disorders. Adv Exp Med Biol 1191:367-
388, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-981-32-9705-0_20
11. Anker JJ, Kushner MG: Co-occurring alcohol use disorder and anxiety: Bridging psychiatric,
psychological, and neurobiological perspectives. Alcohol Res 40(1):arcr.v40.1.03, 2019. doi:
10.35946/arcr.v40.1.03
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/psychiatric-disorders/anxiety-and-stressor-related-disorders/overview-of-anxiety-disorders 10/10
