Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders
Any heart valve can become stenotic or insufficient (also termed regurgitant or incompetent), causing
hemodynamic changes long before symptoms occur. Depending on which valve is involved, the most
common symptoms include dyspnea, fatigue, and peripheral edema. Most often, valvular stenosis or
insufficiency occurs in isolation in individual valves, but multiple valvular disorders may coexist, and a
single valve may be both stenosed and insufficient.
Heart valve disorders include:
Aortic regurgitation: Incomplete closure of the aortic valve, causing backflow of blood from
the aorta into the left ventricle during diastole
Aortic stenosis: Narrowing or restricted opening of the aortic valve, obstructing normal
blood flow from the left ventricle to the ascending aorta during systole
Mitral regurgitation: Incomplete closure of the mitral valve, causing backflow of blood from
the left ventricle (LV) into the left atrium during systole
Mitral valve prolapse: Billowing of mitral valve leaflets into the left atrium during systole
Mitral stenosis: Narrowing of the mitral orifice, obstructing normal blood flow from the left
atrium to the left ventricle during diastole
Pulmonary regurgitation: Incomplete closure of the pulmonary valve, causing backflow of
blood from the pulmonary artery into the right ventricle during diastole
Pulmonary stenosis: Narrowing or restricted opening of the pulmonary outflow tract or
valve, causing obstruction of normal blood flow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary
artery during systole
Tricuspid regurgitation: Incomplete closure of the tricuspid valve, causing backflow of blood
from the right ventricle to the right atrium during systole
Tricuspid stenosis: Narrowing of the tricuspid valve orifice, obstructing normal blood flow
from the right atrium to the right ventricle in diastole
Historically, diagnosis of valvular disorders by observation, palpation, and auscultation was challenging,
particularly for less experienced clinicians (1). Now, with the physical examination supplemented by
echocardiography (cardiac ultrasound), sometimes including handheld ultrasound, diagnosis is more
straightforward. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional studies demonstrate valvular anatomy and
leaflet motion. Doppler echocardiography evaluates pressure gradients and blood flow. Evaluation also
includes ECG (to detect heart rhythm and chamber alterations) and chest radiograph (to detect chamber
alterations, pulmonary congestion, and other lung pathology).
Treatment of Valvular Disorders
Valvuloplasty (valve repair, also called valvotomy) or valve replacement
Management of a valvular lesion commonly requires only periodic observation, with no active treatment
for many years. In general, neither lifestyle measures nor medications alter the natural history of
valvular lesions. Intervention is usually indicated when a moderate or severe valvular lesion causes
symptoms or cardiac dysfunction. Because patients may not recognize symptoms due to their slow
onset, many clinicians use exercise testing to help monitor patients.
The intervention may involve valvuloplasty (valve repair), or valve replacement, which may be
performed percutaneously or surgically. Investigation of different valvular interventions, including
percutaneous valve replacement, has led to an increasing number of therapeutic options and evidence
on how to choose one. For clinicians, the increase in complexity requires a multidisciplinary heart valve
team composed of surgeons, cardiologists, and other specialists to help decide which intervention is
best for a given patient.
If coronary artery bypass surgery is being performed, it is usual to surgically treat (during the same
operation) any moderate or severe valve lesions, even if asymptomatic.
Endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated when there is a history of endocarditis and for patients with
prosthetic heart valves.
Choice of cardiac valve prosthesis
Two kinds of cardiac valve prostheses are used:
Bioprosthetic (porcine, bovine, or homograft)
Mechanical (manufactured)
Both types have similar survival rates and rates of valve thrombosis. Mechanical prostheses have a
higher rate of bleeding complications, and bioprostheses are more likely to require re-intervention
because they deteriorate more rapidly than mechanical valves.
A mechanical valve is usually used (1) in patients who are not contemplating becoming pregnant and
who meet one or more of the following criteria:
Already taking a vitamin K antagonist (eg, for atrial fibrillation) and adhering well to therapy
Under age 50 years (for aortic valve)
Under age 65 years (for mitral valve)
A bioprosthetic valve is recommended to replace the aortic valve for patients > 65 years. For patients
aged 50 to 65 years, the recommendations are guides only because patients' preferences may deviate,
particularly depending on how they perceive bleeding complications versus need for re-intervention.
Anticoagulation for patients with prosthetic cardiac valves or native
valve disease
Anticoagulation is indicated to prevent thromboembolism after valve replacement, and in patients with
atrial fibrillation or other indications for anticoagulation. The duration and medication used differ
depending on the type of prosthetic valve or specific native valve affected and the presence of
underlying atrial fibrillation.
Anticoagulation for patients with prosthetic cardiac valves
Mechanical valve: Lifelong anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist (VKA) is needed as
per the international normalized ratio [INR] targets below.
Bioprosthetic valve: Lifelong aspirin is recommended (those at low bleeding risk may have 3
to 6 months anticoagulation with a VKA before changing to aspirin).
Transcatheter aortic valve: Lifelong aspirin is needed. Addition of either clopidogrel or a VKA
(INR target 2.5) may be considered for 3 to 6 months after implantation for patients with
increased thrombosis risk.
Bioprosthetic valve (including transcatheter) in patients with atrial fibrillation: Direct oral
anticoagulant (DOAC) is preferred over VKA, unless a thromboembolism has occurred while
taking a DOAC. (see also Prevention of thromboembolism) (1, 2, 3).
DOAC (also called non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants or NOAC) are ineffective for mechanical prostheses
and should not be used.
Target INR for most modern mechanical bileaflet prostheses is 2.5, increasing to 3.0 with any of the
following:
Atrial fibrillation
Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 35%
Mitral or tricuspid position
Previous thromboembolism
Patients who self-monitor their INR or follow up with dedicated anticoagulation clinics have less
variability in their INR and fewer adverse events.
If patients have thromboembolism despite an adequate INR, consider adding low-dose aspirin.
When VKA treatment is interrupted, bridging with unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin is
indicated, except in patients with a bileaflet (mechanical) aortic valve replacement and no other risk
factors for thrombosis (previous thromboembolism, atrial fibrillation, LVEF < 35%, > 1 mechanical valve
—1).
Atrial Fibrillation CHA(2)DS(2)-VASc Score for Stroke Risk
Pearls & Pitfalls
Warfarin is the only appropriate oral anticoagulant for thromboembolism prevention in
patients with mechanical valves.
Women who require valve replacement and plan to become pregnant must balance the teratogenic risk
due to warfarin when mechanical valves are used against the risk of accelerated valve deterioration
when bioprosthetic valves are used. Teratogenic risks can be reduced by use of heparin instead of
warfarin in the first 12 weeks and last 2 weeks of the pregnancy, but management is difficult,
complications are increased, and careful discussion is required before surgery.
Anticoagulation for patients with atrial fibrillation and native valve
disease
Patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis should undergo anticoagulation with a VKA.
For those with other native valve disease, DOACs are an alternative to VKAs and may be
preferred in some patient groups, with recommendations varying depending on the specific
valve affected and the CHA2DS2-VASc score (see also Prevention of thromboembolism) (1,
3).
Follow-up of prosthetic valves
Prosthetic valve follow-up is facilitated by obtaining an early postoperative baseline transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE) and by referring to normal echocardiographic parameters (eg, transvalvular
gradients) for the patient's prosthesis type, size, and position. If the postoperative baseline study is
satisfactory and there has been no interval clinical change, then mechanical valves do not require
routine TTE. Patients with bioprosthetic valves should have a follow-up TTE at 5 and 10 years, and then
annually. Patients with transcatheter aortic valve prostheses should have annual TTE as the long-term
durability of these prostheses is not certain.
Thrombus formation on bioprosthetic valves may cause hemodynamic deterioration. Thrombus
formation is difficult to diagnose; computed tomography (CT) and transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE) are often required in addition to TTE. Thrombus formation should be distinguished from other
causes of valve stenosis, because vitamin K antagonism usually results in relief of obstruction that is
caused by thrombus formation.