=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:38.008654",
  "file_size_bytes": 817575,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS)
(Unstable Angina; Acute MI; Myocardial Infarction)
By Ranya N. Sweis, MD, MS, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine;
Arif Jivan, MD, PhD, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2024 | Modified Aug 2025
Acute coronary syndromes result from acute obstruction of a coronary artery.
Consequences depend on degree and location of obstruction and range from
unstable angina to non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI),
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), and sudden cardiac death.
Symptoms are similar in each of these syndromes (except sudden death) and
include chest discomfort with or without dyspnea, nausea, and diaphoresis.
Diagnosis is by electrocardiography (ECG) and biomarkers. Treatment is with
antiplatelets, anticoagulants, nitrates, beta-blockers, and, for STEMI, emergency
reperfusion via fibrinolytic drugs, percutaneous intervention, or, occasionally,
coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
(See also Overview of Coronary Artery Disease.)
Classification of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Acute coronary syndromes include
Unstable angina
Non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
These syndromes all involve acute coronary ischemia and are distinguished based on symptoms, ECG
findings, and cardiac biomarker levels. It is helpful to distinguish the syndromes because prognosis and
treatment vary.
Unstable angina (acute coronary insufficiency, preinfarction angina, intermediate syndrome) is defined
as one or more of the following in patients whose cardiac biomarkers do not meet criteria for
myocardial infarction (MI):
Rest angina that is prolonged (usually > 20 minutes)
 1/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
New-onset angina of at least class 3 severity in the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS)
classification (see table Canadian Cardiovascular Society Classification System for Angina
Pectoris)
Increasing angina, ie, previously diagnosed angina that has become distinctly more
frequent, more severe, longer in duration, or lower in threshold (eg, increased by ≥ 1 CCS
class or to at least CCS class 3)
ECG changes such as ST-segment depression, ST-segment elevation, or T-wave inversion may occur
during unstable angina but they are transient. Of cardiac biomarkers, creatine kinase MB fraction (CK-
MB) is not elevated but cardiac troponin, particularly when measured using high-sensitivity troponin
tests (hs-cTn), may be slightly increased. Unstable angina is clinically unstable and often a prelude to
myocardial infarction or arrhythmias or, less commonly, to sudden death.
Non–ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI, subendocardial MI) is myocardial necrosis (evidenced by
cardiac biomarkers in blood; troponin I or troponin T and CK-MB will be elevated) without acute ST-
segment elevation. ECG changes such as ST-segment depression, T-wave inversion, or both may be
present.
ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI, transmural MI) is myocardial necrosis with ECG changes showing ST-
segment elevation that is not quickly reversed by nitroglycerin or showing new left bundle branch block.
Troponin I or troponin T and CK-MB are elevated.
Both types of MI may or may not produce Q waves on the ECG (Q wave MI, non-Q wave MI).
Etiology of Acute Coronary Syndromes
The most common cause of acute coronary syndromes is
An acute thrombus in an atherosclerotic coronary artery
Atheromatous plaque sometimes becomes unstable or inflamed, causing it to rupture or split, exposing
thrombogenic material, which activates platelets and the coagulation cascade and produces an acute
thrombus. Platelet activation involves a conformational change in membrane glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
receptors, allowing cross-linking (and thus aggregation) of platelets. Even atheromas causing minimal
obstruction can rupture and result in thrombosis; in > 50% of cases, pre-event stenosis is < 40%. Thus,
although the severity of stenosis helps predict symptoms, it does not always predict acute thrombotic
events. The resultant thrombus abruptly interferes with blood flow to parts of the myocardium.
Spontaneous thrombolysis occurs in up to one third of patients (1); 24 hours later, thrombotic
obstruction is found in only about 30%. However, in virtually all cases, obstruction lasts long enough to
cause varying degrees of tissue necrosis.
Rarer causes of acute coronary syndromes are
Coronary artery embolism
Coronary spasm
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection
 2/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Coronary arterial embolism can occur in mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis, infective endocarditis,
nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (marantic endocarditis), or atrial fibrillation.
Cocaine use and other causes of coronary spasm can sometimes result in myocardial infarction. Spasm-
induced MI may occur in normal or atherosclerotic coronary arteries.
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection is a non-traumatic tear in the coronary intima with creation of a
false lumen. Blood flowing through the false lumen expands it, which restricts blood flow through the
true lumen, sometimes causing coronary ischemia or infarction. Dissection may occur in atherosclerotic
or non-atherosclerotic coronary arteries. Non-atherosclerotic dissection is more likely in pregnant or
postpartum patients and/or patients with fibromuscular dysplasia or other connective tissue disorders.
Myocardial infarction in the absence of coronary artery disease
(MINOCA)
Myocardial infarction in the absence of obstructive coronary artery disease (MINOCA) is found in about
5% to 6% of patients with acute MI who undergo coronary angiography (2). Patients with MINOCA tend
to be younger, female, and without dyslipidemia, and they have myocardial necrosis without significant
coronary atherosclerosis. Plaque disruption and coronary vasospasm are common in MINOCA.
Coronary thrombosis or embolism and spontaneous coronary artery dissection are causes of MINOCA.
Etiology references
1. Kanji R, Gue YX, Memtsas V, Spencer NH, Gorog DA: Biomarkers of Thrombotic Status Predict
Spontaneous Reperfusion in Patients With ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction. J Am Coll
Cardiol 81(19):1918–1932, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2023.03.388
2. Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al: Contemporary diagnosis and management of
patients with myocardial infarction in the absence of obstructive coronary artery disease: A
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 139:e891–e908, 2019. doi:
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000670
Pathophysiology of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Initial consequences vary with size, location, and duration of obstruction and range from transient
ischemia to infarction. Measurement of high sensitivity troponin indicates that some cell necrosis
probably occurs even with mild ischemia; thus, ischemic events occur on a continuum, and classification
into subgroups, although useful, is somewhat arbitrary. Sequelae of the acute event depend primarily
on the mass and type of cardiac tissue infarcted.
Myocardial dysfunction
Ischemic (but not infarcted) tissue has impaired contractility and relaxation, resulting in hypokinetic or
akinetic segments; these segments may expand or bulge during systole (called paradoxical motion). The
size of the affected area determines effects, which range from minimal to mild heart failure to
cardiogenic shock; usually, large parts of myocardium must be ischemic to cause significant myocardial
 3/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
dysfunction. Some degree of heart failure occurs in about two thirds of patients hospitalized with acute
myocardial infarction. It is termed ischemic cardiomyopathy if low cardiac output and heart failure
persist. Ischemia involving the papillary muscle may lead to mitral valve regurgitation. Dysfunctional
wall motion can allow mural thrombus formation.
Myocardial infarction (MI)
Myocardial infarction is myocardial necrosis resulting from abrupt reduction in coronary blood flow to
part of the myocardium. Infarcted tissue is permanently dysfunctional; however, there is a zone of
potentially reversible ischemia adjacent to infarcted tissue. MI affects predominantly the left ventricle
(LV), but damage may extend into the right ventricle (RV) or the atria.
Infarction may be
Transmural: Transmural infarcts involve the whole thickness of myocardium from
epicardium to endocardium and are usually characterized by abnormal Q waves on ECG.
Nontransmural (subendocardial): Nontransmural infarcts do not extend through the
ventricular wall and cause only ST-segment and T-wave (ST-T) abnormalities.
Because the transmural depth of necrosis cannot be precisely determined clinically, infarcts are usually
classified as STEMI or NSTEMI by the presence or absence of ST-segment elevation or Q waves on the
ECG.
Necrosis of a significant portion of the interventricular septum or ventricular wall may rupture, with dire
consequences. A ventricular aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm may form.
Electrical dysfunction
Electrical dysfunction can be significant in any form of acute coronary syndrome. Ischemic and necrotic
cells are incapable of normal electrical activity, resulting in various ECG changes (predominantly ST-T
abnormalities), arrhythmias, and conduction disturbances. ST-T abnormalities of ischemia include ST-
segment depression (often downsloping from the J point), T-wave inversion, ST-segment elevation (often
referred to as injury current), and peaked T waves in the hyperacute phase of infarction. Conduction
disturbances can reflect damage to the sinus node, the atrioventricular (AV) node, or specialized
conduction tissues. Most changes are transient; some are permanent.
Symptoms and Signs of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Symptoms of acute coronary syndromes depend somewhat on the extent and location of obstruction
and are quite variable. Painful stimuli from thoracic organs, including the heart, can cause discomfort
described as pressure, tearing, gas with the urge to eructate, indigestion, burning, aching, stabbing, and
sometimes sharp needle-like pain. Many patients describe their symptoms as discomfort rather than
pain. Except when infarction is massive, recognizing the amount of ischemia by symptoms alone is
difficult.
 4/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms of ACS are similar to those of angina and are discussed in more detail in sections on unstable
angina and acute myocardial infarction. Of note, some patients with coronary artery disease
(particularly patients with diabetes) have silent myocardial ischemia, which is typically detected during
stress testing.
Complications
After the acute event, many complications can occur. They usually involve
Electrical dysfunction (eg, conduction defects, arrhythmias)
Myocardial dysfunction (eg, heart failure, interventricular septum or free wall rupture,
ventricular aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, mural thrombus formation, cardiogenic shock)
Valvular dysfunction (typically mitral regurgitation)
Electrical dysfunction can be significant in any form of ACS, but usually, large parts of myocardium must
be ischemic to cause significant myocardial dysfunction. Other complications of ACS include recurrent
ischemia and pericarditis. Pericarditis that occurs 2 to 10 weeks after an MI is known as post-MI
syndrome, or Dressler syndrome.
Diagnosis of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Serial ECGs
Serial cardiac biomarkers
Immediate coronary angiography for patients with STEMI or complications (eg, persistent
chest pain, hypotension, markedly elevated cardiac biomarkers, unstable arrhythmias)
Delayed angiography (24 to 48 hours) for patients with NSTEMI or unstable angina without
complications noted above
Acute coronary syndromes should be considered in males, usually those > age 30 years, and females
usually > age 40 years (younger in patients with diabetes), whose main symptom is chest pain or
discomfort. Pain must be differentiated from the pain of disorders such as pneumonia, pulmonary
embolism, pericarditis, rib fracture, costochondral separation, esophageal spasm, acute aortic
dissection, renal calculus, splenic infarction, or various abdominal disorders. In patients with previously
diagnosed hiatus hernia, peptic ulcer, or a gallbladder disorder, the clinician must be wary of attributing
new symptoms to these disorders. (For approach to diagnosis, see also Chest Pain.)
The approach is the same when any ACS is suspected: initial and serial ECG and serial cardiac biomarker
measurements, which distinguish among unstable angina, NSTEMI, and STEMI. Every emergency
department should have a triage system to immediately identify patients with chest pain for rapid
assessment and ECG. Pulse oximetry and chest x-ray (particularly to look for mediastinal widening,
which suggests aortic dissection) are also done.
ECG
 5/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
ECG is the most important test and should be done as soon as possible (eg, within 10 minutes of
presentation). It is the center of the decision pathway because fibrinolytics benefit patients with STEMI
but may increase risk for those with NSTEMI. Also, urgent cardiac catheterization is indicated for
patients with acute STEMI but not for those with NSTEMI.
For STEMI, initial ECG is usually diagnostic, showing ST-segment elevation ≥ 1 mm in 2 or more
contiguous leads subtending the damaged area (see figure Acute Lateral Left Ventricular Infarction).
Acute Lateral Left Ventricular Infarction (tracing obtained within a few hours of
onset of illness)
There is striking hyperacute ST-segment elevation in leads I, aVL, V , and V and reciprocal
4 6
depression in other leads.
Pathologic Q waves are not necessary for the diagnosis. The ECG must be read carefully because ST-
segment elevation may be subtle, particularly in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF); sometimes the reader’s
attention is mistakenly focused on leads with ST-segment depression. If symptoms are characteristic,
ST-segment elevation on ECG has a specificity of up to 94% and a sensitivity of up to 55% for diagnosing
MI (1). Serial tracings (obtained every 8 hours for 1 day, then daily) showing a gradual evolution toward
a stable, more normal pattern or development of abnormal Q waves over a few days (see figure Inferior
(Diaphragmatic) Left Ventricular Infarction) tends to confirm the diagnosis.
Inferior (Diaphragmatic) Left Ventricular Infarction (after the first 24 hours)
Significant Q waves develop with decreasing ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF.
Because nontransmural (non–Q wave) infarcts are usually in the subendocardial or midmyocardial
layers, they do not produce diagnostic Q waves or distinct ST-segment elevation on the ECG. Instead,
they commonly produce only varying degrees of ST-T abnormalities that are less striking, variable, or
nonspecific and sometimes difficult to interpret (NSTEMI). If such abnormalities resolve (or worsen) on
repeat ECGs, ischemia is very likely. However, when repeat ECGs are unchanged, acute MI is unlikely
and, if still suspected clinically, requires other evidence to make the diagnosis. A normal ECG taken
 6/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
when a patient is free of pain does not rule out unstable angina; a normal ECG taken when a patient is
experiencing pain, although it does not rule out angina, suggests that the pain is not ischemic.
If right ventricular (RV) infarction is suspected, a 15-lead ECG is usually recorded; additional leads are
placed at V4R, and, to detect posterior infarction, V8 and V9.
ECG diagnosis of myocardial infarction is more difficult when a left bundle branch block configuration is
present because the ECG changes resemble changes due to STEMI (see figure Left Bundle Branch
Block). ST-segment elevation concordant with the QRS complex strongly suggests MI as does > 5-mm ST-
segment elevation in at least 2 precordial leads. But generally, any patient with suggestive symptoms
and new-onset (or not known to be old) left bundle branch block is treated as for STEMI.
Left Bundle Branch Block
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
M.I. Prediction Decision TreeCalc
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Non Q Wave Myocardial Infarction Prediction
Cardiac biomarkers
Cardiac biomarkers (serum biomarkers of myocardial cell injury) are
Cardiac enzymes (eg, CK-MB [creatine kinase MB isoenzyme])
Cell contents (eg, troponin I, troponin T, myoglobin)
 7/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
These biomarkers are released into the bloodstream after myocardial cell necrosis. The biomarkers
appear at different times after injury, and levels decrease at different rates. Sensitivity and specificity for
myocardial cell injury vary significantly among these biomarkers. Assays that measure cardiac troponins
(cTn), which have been in use for many years, are sensitive and specific. Newer, highly sensitive assays
of cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) that are also very precise are preferred. These assays can reliably measure
cTn levels (T or I) as low as 0.003 to 0.006 ng/mL (3 to 6 pg/mL); some research assays go as low as 0.001
ng/mL (1 pg/mL).
The less sensitive cTn tests were unlikely to detect cardiac troponins except in patients who had an
acute cardiac disorder. Thus, a "positive" cTn test (ie, above the limit of detection) was very specific.
However, hs-cTn tests can detect small amounts of troponin in many healthy people. Thus, troponin
levels detected with hs-cTn tests need to be referenced to the normal range, and are defined as
"elevated" only when higher than 99% of the reference population. Furthermore, although an elevated
troponin level indicates myocardial cell injury, it does not indicate the cause of the damage (although
any troponin elevation increases the risk of adverse outcomes in many disorders). In addition to acute
coronary syndromes, many other cardiac and non-cardiac disorders can elevate cardiac troponin levels
(see table Causes of Elevated Troponin Levels); not all elevated levels detected with hs-cTn represent
myocardial infarction, and not all myocardial necrosis results from an acute coronary syndrome event
even when the etiology is ischemic. However, by detecting lower levels of troponin, hs-cTn assays
enable earlier identification of MI than other assays, and have replaced other cardiac biomarker tests in
many centers.
Patients suspected of having an ACS should have an hs-cTn assay done on presentation and again 2 to 3
hours later. Troponin should be measured at 0 and 6 hours if a standard cTn assay is used.
An hs-cTn level must be interpreted based on the patient's pre-test probability of disease, which is
estimated clinically based on
Risk factors for ACS
Symptoms
ECG findings
A high pre-test probability plus an elevated troponin level detected with an hs-cTn assay is highly
suggestive of ACS, whereas a low pre-test probability plus a normal hs-cTn assay result is unlikely to
represent ACS (2). Diagnosis is more challenging when test results are discordant with pre-test
probability, in which case serial hs-cTn assays often help. A patient with low pre-test probability and an
initially slightly elevated troponin level detected with hs-cTn that remains stable on repeat testing
probably has non-ACS cardiac disease (eg, heart failure, stable coronary artery disease). However, if the
repeat level rises significantly (ie, > 20 to 50%), the likelihood of ACS becomes much higher. If a patient
with high pre-test probability has a normal troponin level detected with hs-cTn and that rises > 50% on
repeat testing, ACS is likely; continued normal levels (often including at 6 hours and beyond when
suspicion is high) suggest need to pursue an alternate diagnosis.
TABLE
Causes of Elevated Troponin Levels
 8/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Type Conditions
Myocardial ischemia
Classic AMI
ACS STEMI
NSTEMI
Increased demand (stable coronary
artery disease lesion)
Coronary artery spasm, embolism, or
Non-ACS (coronary)
dissection
Procedure-related (PCI, CABG)
Cocaine or methamphetamine
Hypoxia
Global ischemia
Non-ACS (noncoronary)
Hypoperfusion
Cardiothoracic surgery
Sudden cardiac death —
Direct myocardial damage (nonischemic)
Heart failure
Cardiomyopathy (eg, hypertrophic, viral)
Hypertension
Myocarditis
Pericarditis
Cardiac disorders
Injury (ablation procedures, cardiac
contusion, cardioversion, electrical
shock)
Cancer
Infiltrative disorders (eg, amyloidosis)
Systemic disorders Pulmonary embolism
Toxicity (eg, anthracyclines)
Trauma (eg, severe burns)
Extreme exertion
 9/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Type Conditions
Renal failure
Sepsis
Stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Analytical
Poor performance
Assay-based
Calibration errors
Heterophile antibody
Sample-based
Interference by substances
ACS = acute coronary syndrome; AMI = acute MI; CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; MI
= myocardial infarction; NSTEMI = non–ST-segment elevation MI; PCI = percutaneous
coronary intervention; STEMI = ST-segment elevation MI.
Coronary angiography
Coronary angiography most often combines diagnosis with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI—
ie, angioplasty, stent placement). When possible, emergency coronary angiography and PCI are done as
soon as possible after the onset of acute myocardial infarction (primary PCI). In many tertiary centers,
this approach has significantly lowered morbidity and mortality and improved long-term outcomes.
Frequently, the infarction is actually aborted when the time from pain to PCI is short (< 3 to 4 hours).
Angiography is obtained urgently for patients with STEMI, patients with persistent chest pain despite
maximal medical therapy, and patients with complications (eg, markedly elevated cardiac biomarkers,
presence of cardiogenic shock, acute mitral regurgitation, ventricular septal defect, unstable
arrhythmias). Patients with uncomplicated NSTEMI or unstable angina whose symptoms have resolved
typically undergo angiography within the first 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization to detect lesions that
may require treatment.
Other tests
Routine laboratory tests are nondiagnostic but, if obtained, show nonspecific abnormalities compatible
with tissue necrosis (eg, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, moderately elevated white blood cell
count with a shift to the left). A fasting lipid profile should be obtained within the first 24 hours for all
patients hospitalized with ACS.
Myocardial imaging is not needed to make the diagnosis if cardiac biomarkers or ECG is positive.
However, in patients with myocardial infarction, bedside echocardiography is invaluable for detecting
mechanical complications. Before or shortly after discharge, patients with symptoms suggesting an ACS
 10/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
but with nondiagnostic ECGs and normal cardiac biomarker levels should have a stress imaging test
(radionuclide or echocardiographic imaging with pharmacologic or exercise stress). Imaging
abnormalities in such patients indicate increased risk of complications in the next 3 to 6 months and
suggest need for angiography (3), which should be done before discharge or soon thereafter, with PCI
or CABG done as necessary.
Right heart catheterization using a balloon-tipped pulmonary artery catheter can be used to measure
right heart, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary artery occlusion pressures and cardiac output. This test is
not routinely recommended and should be done only if patients have significant complications (eg,
severe heart failure, hypoxia, hypotension) and by clinicians experienced with catheter placement and
management protocols.
Diagnosis references
1. Menown IB, Mackenzie G, Adgey AA. Optimizing the initial 12-lead electrocardiographic
diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J 2000;21(4):275-283.
doi:10.1053/euhj.1999.1748
2. Badertscher P, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, et al. Effect of Acute Coronary Syndrome
Probability on Diagnostic and Prognostic Performance of High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin. Clin
Chem 2018;64(3):515-525. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2017.279513
3. Møller JE, Hillis GS, Oh JK, Reeder GS, Gersh BJ, Pellikka PA. Wall motion score index and ejection
fraction for risk stratification after acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J 2006;151(2):419-425.
doi:10.1016/j.ahj.2005.03.042
Treatment of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Prehospital care: Oxygen, aspirin, and nitrates and triage to an appropriate medical center
Pharmacologic therapy: Antiplatelet agents, antianginal drugs, anticoagulants, and in some
cases other medications
Often, angiography to assess coronary artery anatomy
Often, reperfusion therapy: Fibrinolytics, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), or
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
Supportive care
Post-discharge cardiac rehabilitation and chronic management of coronary artery disease
Treatment, including pharmacologic therapy, is designed to relieve distress, interrupt thrombosis,
reverse ischemia, limit infarct size, reduce cardiac workload, and prevent and treat complications. An
acute coronary syndrome is a medical emergency; outcome is greatly influenced by rapid diagnosis and
treatment.
Treatment occurs simultaneously with diagnosis.
Contributing disorders (eg, anemia, heart failure) are aggressively treated.
 11/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Because the chest pain of myocardial infarction usually subsides within 12 to 24 hours, any chest pain
that remains or recurs later is investigated. It may indicate such complications as recurrent ischemia,
pericarditis, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, gastritis, or ulcer.
Prehospital care
Oxygen
Aspirin
Nitrates
Triage to appropriate medical center
A reliable IV route must be established, oxygen given (typically 2 L by nasal cannula) if patients are
hypoxemic, and continuous single-lead ECG monitoring started. Prehospital interventions by emergency
medical personnel—including ECG, chewed aspirin (160 to 325 mg), pain management with nitrates (see
Medications for Acute Coronary Syndromes), early thrombolysis when indicated and possible, and triage
to the appropriate hospital where primary PCI is available—can reduce risk of mortality and
complications (1, 2).
Although opioids have long been used to treat pain in patients with acute coronary syndromes, data
suggest that morphine attenuates activity of some P2Y12 receptor inhibitors and may contribute to
worse patient outcomes (3, 4).
Early diagnostic data and response to treatment can help determine the need for and timing of
revascularization when primary percutaneous coronary intervention is not possible.
Hospital admission
Pharmacologic therapy with antiplatelets, anticoagulants, and other medications based on
reperfusion strategy
Risk-stratify patient and choose a reperfusion strategy (fibrinolytics or cardiac angiography
with PCI or CABG for patients with STEMI and cardiac angiography with PCI or CABG for
patients with unstable angina or NSTEMI)
On arrival to the emergency department, the patient's diagnosis is confirmed. Pharmacologic therapy
and choice of revascularization depend on the type of acute coronary syndrome as well as the clinical
picture (see figure Approach to Acute Coronary Syndromes). Approach to pharmacologic therapy is
discussed in Medications for Acute Coronary Syndrome, and choice of reperfusion strategy is further
discussed in Revascularization for Acute Coronary Syndromes.
 12/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Approach to Acute Coronary Syndromes
* Morphine should be used judiciously (eg, if nitroglycerin is contraindicated or if the patient
has symptoms despite nitroglycerin therapy). Data suggest that morphine attenuates activity of
some P2Y12 receptor inhibitors and may contribute to worse patient outcomes (Kubica J,
Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al: Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure and action
in patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J 37(3): 245–252, 2016. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv547 and Meine TJ,
Roe MT, Chen AY, et al: Association of intravenous morphine use and outcomes in acute
coronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE Quality Improvement Initiative. Am Heart
149(6):1043-1049, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2005.02.010).
† Complicated means that the hospital course was complicated by recurrent angina or
infarction, heart failure, or sustained recurrent ventricular arrhythmias. Absence of any of these
events is termed uncomplicated.
 13/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
‡ CABG is still generally preferred to PCI for patients with the following:
Left main or left main equivalent disease
Left ventricular dysfunction
Diabetes
Also, lesions that are long or near bifurcation points are often not amenable to PCI.
CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; GP = glycoprotein; NSTEMI = non–ST-segment elevation
MI; MI = myocardial infarction; PCI = percutaneous intervention; STEMI = ST-segment elevation
MI.
When the diagnosis is unclear, bedside cardiac biomarker measurements can help identify low-risk
patients with a suspected ACS (eg, those with initially negative cardiac biomarkers and nondiagnostic
ECGs), who can be managed in 24-hour observation units or chest pain centers. Higher-risk patients
should be admitted to a monitored inpatient unit or critical care unit (CCU). Several validated tools can
help stratify risk. Thrombolysis in MI (TIMI) risk scores may be the most widely used.
Patients with suspected NSTEMI and intermediate or high risk should be admitted to an inpatient care
unit or CCU. Those with STEMI should be admitted to a CCU.
Only heart rate and rhythm recorded by single-lead ECG are consistently useful for routine, continuous
monitoring. However, some clinicians recommend routine multilead monitoring with continuous ST-
segment recording to identify transient, recurrent ST-segment elevations or depressions. Such findings,
even in patients without symptoms, suggest ischemia and identify higher-risk patients who may require
more aggressive evaluation and treatment.
Qualified nurses can interpret the ECG for arrhythmia and initiate protocols for its treatment. All staff
members should know how to do CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation).
Supportive care
Patients with successful, uncomplicated primary PCI for acute MI may be ambulated quickly and be
safely discharged in 2 to 4 days.
If reperfusion is not successful or complications are present, patients require longer monitoring for
hemodynamic and electric instability while also initiating ambulation. Prolonged bed rest results in rapid
physical deconditioning, with development of orthostatic hypotension, decreased work capacity,
increased heart rate during exertion, and increased risk of deep venous thrombosis. Prolonged bed rest
also intensifies feelings of depression and helplessness.
Anxiety, mood changes, and denial are common. A mild tranquilizer (usually a benzodiazepine) is often
given, but many experts believe such agents are rarely needed. Reactive depression is common by the
third day of illness and is almost universal at some time during recovery.
 14/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
After the acute phase of illness, the most important tasks are often management of depression,
rehabilitation, and institution of long-term preventive programs. Overemphasis on bed rest, inactivity,
and the seriousness of the disorder reinforces anxiety and depressive tendencies, so patients are
encouraged to sit up, get out of bed, and engage in appropriate activities as soon as possible. The
effects of the disorder, prognosis, and individualized rehabilitation program should be explained to the
patient.
Maintaining normal bowel function with stool softeners (eg, docusate) to prevent straining is important.
Urinary retention is common among older patients, especially after several days of bed rest or if
atropine was given. A catheter may be required but can usually be removed when the patient can stand
or sit to void.
For patients who smoke, smoking cessation should be addressed during the hospitalization. All
caregivers should devote considerable effort to making smoking cessation permanent.
Although acutely ill patients have little appetite, tasty food in modest amounts is good for morale.
Patients are usually offered a soft diet of 1500 to 1800 kcal/day with sodium reduction to 2 to 3 g.
Sodium reduction is not required after the first 2 or 3 days if there is no evidence of heart failure.
Patients are given a diet low in cholesterol and saturated fats, which is used to teach healthy eating.
For patients with diabetes and STEMI, intensive glucose control is not recommended; guidelines call for
an insulin-based regimen to achieve and maintain glucose levels < 180 mg/dL (9.9 mmol/L) while
avoiding hypoglycemia.
Treatment references
1. Nakayama N, Yamamoto T, Kikuchi M, et al: Prehospital Administration of Aspirin and
Nitroglycerin for Patients With Suspected Acute Coronary Syndrome— A Systematic Review. Circ
Rep 4(10):449–457, 2022. Published 2022 Jul 28. doi:10.1253/circrep.CR-22-0060
2. Savage ML, Hay K, Vollbon W, et al: Prehospital Activation of the Cardiac Catheterization
Laboratory in ST-Segment-Elevation Myocardial Infarction for Primary Percutaneous Coronary
Intervention. J Am Heart Assoc 12(14):e029346, 2023. doi:10.1161/JAHA.122.029346
3. Kubica J, Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al: Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure
and action in patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J 37(3): 245–252, 2016. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv547
4. Meine TJ, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al: Association of intravenous morphine use and outcomes in
acute coronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE Quality Improvement Initiative. Am Heart
149(6):1043-1049, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2005.02.010
Rehabilitation and Post-Discharge Treatment
Functional evaluation
Changes in lifestyle: Regular exercise, diet modification, weight loss, smoking cessation
Medications: Continuation of antiplatelets, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and statins
 15/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Functional evaluation
Patients who did not have coronary angiography during admission, have no high-risk features (eg, heart
failure, recurrent angina, ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation after 24 hours, mechanical
complications such as new murmurs, shock), and have an ejection fraction > 40% whether or not they
received fibrinolytics usually should have stress testing of some sort before or shortly after discharge
(see table Functional Evaluation After Myocardial Infarction).
TABLE
Functional Evaluation After Myocardial Infarction
If ECG Is Not
Exercise Capacity If ECG Is Interpretable
Interpretable
Submaximal or symptom-
Exercise echocardiography
Able to exercise limited stress ECG before
or nuclear scanning
or after discharge
Pharmacologic stress Pharmacologic stress
Unable to exercise testing (echocardiography testing (echocardiography
or nuclear scanning) or nuclear scanning)
Activity
Physical activity is gradually increased during the first 3 to 6 weeks after discharge. Resumption of
sexual activity, often of great concern to the patient and partner, and other moderate physical activities
may be encouraged. If good cardiac function is maintained 6 weeks after acute myocardial infarction,
most patients can return to all their normal activities. A regular exercise program consistent with
lifestyle, age, and cardiac status reduces risk of ischemic events and enhances general well-being.
Supervised cardiac rehabilitation programs decrease mortality after revascularization (1).
Risk factor modification
The acute illness and treatment of ACS should be used to strongly motivate the patient to modify risk
factors. Evaluating the patient’s physical and emotional statuses and discussing them with the patient,
advising about lifestyle (eg, smoking, diet, work and play habits, exercise), and aggressively managing
risk factors may improve prognosis.
Medications
Several medications clearly reduce mortality risk post-MI and are used unless contraindicated or not
tolerated:
Aspirin and other antiplatelet agents
Beta blockers
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
 16/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Statins
Other medications that can reduce cardiovascular events include:
PCSK9 inhibitors, when added to statins when further reduction in lipid levels is needed
Aspirin and other antiplatelet agents reduce mortality and reinfarction rates in patients after myocardial
infarction. Enteric-coated aspirin 81 mg once a day is recommended long-term. Dual antiplatelet
therapy with aspirin and a P2Y12 receptor blocker (eg, ticagrelor, clopidogrel) for up to 1 year is
recommended (2, 3).
Beta-blockers are considered standard therapy. Most available beta-blockers (eg, acebutolol, atenolol,
metoprolol, propranolol, timolol) reduce post-MI mortality rate by about 25% (4).
ACE inhibitors are also considered standard therapy and are given to all post-MI patients if possible,
particularly if ejection fraction post MI is < 40%. These agents may provide long-term cardioprotection
by improving endothelial function. If an ACE inhibitor is not tolerated because of cough or rash (but not
angioedema or renal dysfunction), an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) may be substituted.
Statins are also standard therapy and are routinely prescribed for MI patients with coronary artery
disease, regardless of lipid levels (5). Reducing cholesterol levels after MI reduces rates of recurrent
ischemic events and mortality in patients with elevated or normal cholesterol levels. The statin should
be continued indefinitely, unless significant adverse effects occur, and dose should be increased to the
maximally tolerated dose. A non-statin lipid-lowering medication should be added for patients whose
LDL remains ≥ 70 mg/dL (≥ 1.81 mmol/L) on maximally tolerated statin therapy after 4 to 8 weeks.
Mineralocorticoid receptor inhibitors (spironolactone or eplerenone) are indicated for patients with left
ventricular dysfunction following MI, especially when symptomatic, to reduce morbidity and mortality
(6).
Rehabilitation and post-discharge treatment references
1. Dibben G, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al: Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary heart
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11(11):CD001800, 2011.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001800.pub4
2. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM, et al: 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease
prevention in clinical practice: Developed by the Task Force for cardiovascular disease prevention
in clinical practice with representatives of the European Society of Cardiology and 12 medical
societies With the special contribution of the European Association of Preventive Cardiology
(EAPC). Eur Heart J 42 (34): 3227–3337 2021. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab484
3. Wallentin L, Becker RC, Budaj A, et al: Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute
coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 361:1045–1057, 2009. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0904327
4. Pedersen SB, Nielsen JC, Bøtker HE, Udupi A, Goldberger JJ: Long-Term Follow-Up After Acute
Myocardial Infarction According to Beta-Blocker Dose. Am J Med 136(5):458–465.e3, 2023.
doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2023.02.006
5. Rao SV, O'Donoghue ML, Ruel M, et al: 2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI Guideline for the
Management of Patients With Acute Coronary Syndromes: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published
 17/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
correction appears in J Am Coll Cardiol. 2025 May 13;85(18):1800. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2025.03.500.].
J Am Coll Cardiol Feb 27:S0735-1097(24)10424-X. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2024.11.009
6. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al: Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with
left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction [published correction appears in N Engl J
Med. 2003 May 29;348(22):2271]. N Engl J Med 348(14):1309-1321, 2003.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa030207
Prognosis for Acute Coronary Syndromes
Global risk should be estimated via formal clinical risk scores (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction
[TIMI], Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events [GRACE], Platelet Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa in Unstable
Angina: Receptor Suppression Using Integrilin Therapy [PURSUIT]—1) or a combination of the following
high-risk features:
Recurrent angina/ischemia at rest or during low-level activity
Heart failure
Worsening mitral regurgitation
High-risk stress test result (test stopped in ≤ 5 minutes due to symptoms, marked ECG
abnormalities, hypotension, or complex ventricular arrhythmias)
Hemodynamic instability
Sustained ventricular tachycardia
Diabetes mellitus
PCI within past 6 months
Prior CABG
LV ejection fraction < 0.40
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Score for Unstable Angina Non ST
Elevation Myocardial Infarction
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Score for ST Elevation Acute
Myocardial Infarction
Prognosis reference
1. Boersma E, Pieper KS, Steyerberg EW, et al: Predictors of outcome in patients with acute
coronary syndromes without persistent ST-segment elevation. Results from an international trial
of 9461 patients. The PURSUIT Investigators. Circulation 101(22): 2557–2567, 2000.
 18/19

 Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes (ACS) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Unstable angina, non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) represent worsening degrees of
myocardial ischemia and necrosis; the distinctions help differentiate prognosis and
guide treatment.
Diagnosis is based on serial ECG and cardiac biomarker levels, particularly using high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn) assays.
Immediate medical treatment depends on the specific syndrome and patient
characteristics but typically involves antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, beta-blockers,
and nitrates as needed (eg, for chest pain, hypertension, pulmonary edema), and a
statin to improve prognosis.
For unstable angina and NSTEMI, do angiography within 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization
to identify coronary lesions requiring percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG); fibrinolysis is not indicated.
For STEMI, do emergency PCI when door to balloon-inflation time is < 90 minutes; do
fibrinolysis if such timely PCI is not available.
Following recovery, initiate or continue aspirin and other antiplatelet agents, beta-
blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and statins in most cases unless
contraindicated.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 19/19
