=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Overview of Channelopathies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:28.006612",
  "file_size_bytes": 129993,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Overview of Channelopathies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Overview of Channelopathies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Overview of Channelopathies
By L. Brent Mitchell, MD, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, University of Calgary
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2024 | Modified Sept 2024
Channelopathies are a group of genetic, autoimmune, or inflammatory conditions that alter
cardiomyocyte ion channel function in a manner that predisposes to bradyarrhythmias or
tachyarrhythmias in the absence of a structural heart disorder. Sudden cardiac death may occur.
The ion channels affected include those responsible for the inward sodium or calcium currents and
those responsible for the outward potassium current. Either gain of function or loss of function in these
ion channels, particularly when the abnormal channels are unevenly distributed, fosters abnormal
electrophysiologic environments. The abnormal electrophysiology may be favorable to one or both of
the following:
Failure of impulse formation or conduction, which may lead to bradyarrhythmias
Re-entry and mechanisms of abnormal automaticity, leading to tachyarrhythmias
The most common genetic channelopathies are the Brugada syndrome (BrS), catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), early repolarization syndrome (ERS), idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation (IVF), isolated progressive cardiac conduction disease (isolated PCCD), long QT interval
syndromes (LQTS), and short QT interval syndrome (SQTS). Together, documented instances of these
genetic channelopathies account for approximately 40% of sudden cardiac deaths in non-athletes ≤ 35
years of age (1) and undocumented genetic channelopathies are generally considered to be the etiology
of sudden death in the 35% of such patients with no identifiable structural heart disease at autopsy (1).
Systemic rheumatic disorders, including Sjogren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus, and
inflammatory disorders producing cytokines that affect cardiomyocyte ion channel function are
increasingly being recognized as causes of channelopathies. Anti-Ro/SSA antibodies may produce a long
QT interval syndrome by inhibiting the outward potassium channel that is related to the human ether-a-
go-go-related gene (hERG). Also, transplacental exposure to anti-Ro/SSA antibodies in utero is
responsible for some cases of immune-mediated congenital AV block. Autoimmune antibody
production and inflammatory cytokines may also be responsible for temporal variability in arrhythmia
propensities, such as the deleterious effects of fever in patients with Brugada syndrome.
Diagnostic evaluation for genetic channelopathies usually includes ECG, ambulatory cardiac monitoring,
and sometimes exercise testing. Genetic testing is frequently done but may not be recommended if its
sensitivity for a particular disorder is low. Patients diagnosed with a channelopathy should have regular
follow-up with ECG and ambulatory cardiac monitoring to detect occult arrhythmias.
 1/2

 Overview of Channelopathies - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Family members are at risk of disease and should have clinical evaluation (ie, to detect symptoms
suggestive of arrhythmia), ECG, ambulatory monitoring, and, sometimes, exercise testing to identify the
presence of disease prior to its expression as sudden death. Genetic testing of family members is done
when the index case has a known mutation. Typically, parents and siblings are tested first and then
other relatives are tested based on results of parent testing and the mode of inheritance (cascade
testing). Family members also require ongoing clinical monitoring (eg, every 1 to 3 years) for
development of arrhythmias unless the genetic mutation is absent.
Treatments depend on disease manifestations, but all patients should avoid known triggers (eg,
exercise, certain medications). Patients with clinical or ECG findings of significant ventricular
arrhythmias typically require an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), often one with pacemaker
functionality. Some disorders benefit from beta-blockers and/or other antiarrhythmic medications.
Reference
1. D'Ascenzi F, Valentini F, Pistoresi S, et al: Causes of sudden cardiac death in young athletes and
non-athletes: systematic review and meta-analysis: Sudden cardiac death in the young. Trends
Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Jul;32(5):299-308. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2021.06.001
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 2/2
