=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:57.559959",
  "file_size_bytes": 2217694,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database
does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National
Institutes of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
BMJ. 2002 Jun 8;324(7350):1382–1385. doi: 10.1136/bmj.324.7350.1382
Paediatric electrocardiography
Steve Goodacre, Karen McLeod
Article notes Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC1123332 PMID: 12052812
General clinicians and junior paediatricians may have little experience of interpreting paediatric
electrocardiograms. Although the basic principles of cardiac conduction and depolarisation are the
same as for adults, age related changes in the anatomy and physiology of infants and children
produce normal ranges for electrocardiographic features that differ from adults and vary with age.
Awareness of these differences is the key to correct interpretation of paediatric electrocardiograms.
Successful use of paediatric electrocardiography
Be aware of age related differences in the indications for performing
electrocardiography, the normal ranges for electrocardiographic variables, and the
typical abnormalities in infants and children
Genuine abnormality is unusual; if abnormality is suspected, seek a specialist opinion
 1/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Indications for paediatric electrocardiography
• Syncope or seizure • Electrolyte disturbance
• Exertional symptoms • Kawasaki disease
• Drug ingestion • Rheumatic fever
• Tachyarrhythmia • Myocarditis
• Bradyarrhythmia • Myocardial contusion
• Cyanotic episodes • Pericarditis
• Heart failure • Post cardiac surgery
• Hypothermia • Congenital heart defects
Open in a new tab
Recording the electrocardiogram
To obtain a satisfactory recording in young children requires patience, and the parents may be helpful
in providing a source of distraction. Limb electrodes may be placed in a more proximal position to
reduce movement artefacts. Standard adult electrode positions are used but with the addition of
either lead V3R or lead V4R to detect right ventricular or atrial hypertrophy. Standard paper speed
(25 mm/s) and deflection (10 mm/mV) are used, although occasionally large QRS complexes may
require the gain to be halved.
 2/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Paediatric electrocardiographic findings that may be normal
Heart rate >100 beats/min
QRS axis >90°
Right precordial T wave inversion
Dominant right precordial R waves
Short PR and QT intervals
Short P wave and short duration of QRS complexes
Inferior and lateral Q waves
Indications for electrocardiography
Chest pain in children is rarely cardiac in origin and is often associated with tenderness in the chest
wall. Electrocardiography is not usually helpful in making a diagnosis, although a normal trace can
be very reassuring to the family. Typical indications for paediatric electrocardiography include
syncope, exertional symptoms, tachyarrhythmias, bradyarrhythmias, and drug ingestion. Use of
electrocardiography to evaluate congenital heart defects is a specialist interest and will not be
discussed here.
Age related changes in normal electrocardiograms
Features that would be diagnosed as abnormal in an adult's electrocardiogram may be normal, age
related changes in a paediatric trace. The explanation for why this is so lies in how the heart develops
during infancy and childhood.
At birth the right ventricle is larger than the left. Changes in systemic vascular resistance result in the
left ventricle increasing in size until it is larger than the right ventricle by age 1 month. By age 6
months, the ratio of the right ventricle to the left ventricle is similar to that of an adult. Right axis
deviation, large precordial R waves, and upright T waves are therefore normal in the neonate. The T
wave in lead V1 inverts by 7 days and typically remains inverted until at least age 7 years. Upright T
waves in the right precordial leads (V1 to V3) between ages 7 days and 7 years are a potentially
important abnormality and usually indicate right ventricular hypertrophy.
The QRS complex also reflects these changes. At birth, the mean QRS axis lies between +60° and
+160°, R waves are prominent in the right precordium, and S waves are prominent in the left
precordium. By age 1 year, the axis changes gradually to lie between +10° and +100°.
 3/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
The resting heart rate decreases from about 140 beats/min at birth to 120 beats/min at age 1 year,
100 at 5 years, and adult values by 10 years. The PR interval decreases from birth to age 1 year and
then gradually increases throughout childhood. The P wave duration and the QRS duration also
increase with age. The QT interval depends on heart rate and age, increasing with age while
decreasing with heart rate. Q waves are normally seen in the inferior or lateral leads but signify
disease if present in other leads.
Abnormal paediatric electrocardiograms
Diagnosis of abnormality on a paediatric electrocardiogram will require knowledge of normal age
related values, particularly for criteria relating to right or left ventricular hypertrophy.
P wave amplitude varies little with age and is best evaluated from lead II, V1, or V4R. Wide P waves
indicate left atrial hypertrophy, and P waves taller than 2.5 mm in lead II indicate right atrial
hypertrophy. P waves showing an abnormal pattern, such as inversion in leads II or aVF, indicate
atrial activation from a site other than the sinoatrial node.
Prolongation of the QRS complex may be due to bundle branch block, ventricular hypertrophy,
metabolic disturbances, or drugs.
Diagnosis of ventricular hypertrophy by “voltage criteria” will depend on age adjusted values for R
wave and S wave amplitudes. However, several electrocardiographic features may be useful in
making a diagnosis. A qR complex or an rSR′ pattern in lead V1, upright T waves in the right
precordial leads between ages 7 days and 7 years, marked right axis deviation (particularly
associated with right atrial enlargement), and complete reversal of the adult precordial pattern of R
and S waves will all suggest right ventricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular hypertrophy may be
indicated by deep Q waves in the left precordial leads or the typical adult changes of lateral ST
depression and T wave inversion.
 4/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Normal values in paediatric electrocardiograms
Age PR interval QRS duration R wave (S wave)
(ms) (ms) amplitude (mm)
Lead V1 Lead V6
Birth 80-160 <75 5-26 (1-23) 0-12 (0-10)
6 70-150 <75 3-20 (1-17) 6-22 (0-10)
months
1 year 70-150 <75 2-20 (1-20) 6-23 (0-7)
5 years 80-160 <80 1-16 (2-22) 8-25 (0-5)
10 years 90-170 <85 1-12 (3-25) 9-26 (0-4)
Open in a new tab
The QT interval must be corrected for heart rate by dividing its value by the square root of the R-R
interval. A corrected QT interval exceeding 0.45 s should be considered prolonged, but it should be
noted that the QT interval is highly variable in the first three days of life. QT prolongation may be
seen in association with hypokalaemia, hypocalcaemia, hypothermia, drug treatment, cerebral injury,
and the congenital long QT syndrome. Other features of the long QT syndrome include notching of
the T waves, abnormal U waves, relative bradycardia for age, and T wave alternans. These children
may be at risk of ventricular arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death.
Q waves are normally present in leads II, III, aVF, V5, and V6. Q waves in other leads are rare and
associated with disease—for example, an anomalous left coronary artery, or myocardial infarction
secondary to Kawasaki syndrome,.
ST segment elevation may be a normal finding in teenagers as a result of early repolarisation. It may
also be seen in myocardial infarction, myocarditis, or pericarditis.
In addition to the changes seen in ventricular hypertrophy, T waves may be inverted as a result of
myocardial disease (inflammation, infarction, or contusion). Flat T waves are seen in association with
hypothyroidism. Abnormally tall T waves occur with hyperkalaemia.
 5/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Abnormalities of rate and rhythm
The wide variation in children's heart rate with age and activity may lead to misinterpretation by
those more used to adult electrocardiography. Systemic illness must be considered in any child
presenting with an abnormal cardiac rate or rhythm. Sinus tachycardia in babies and infants can
result in rates of up to 240 beats/min, and hypoxia, sepsis, acidosis, or intracranial lesions may cause
bradycardia. Sinus arrhythmia is a common feature in children's electrocardiograms and is often
quite marked. Its relation to breathing—slowing on expiration and speeding up on inspiration—
allows diagnosis.
The approach to electrocardiographic diagnosis of tachyarrhythmias in children is similar to that used
in adults. Most narrow complex tachycardias in children are due to atrioventricular re-entrant
tachycardia secondary to an accessory pathway. If the pathway conducts only retrogradely, the
electrocardiogram in sinus rhythm will be normal and the pathway is said to be “concealed.” If the
pathway conducts anterogradely in sinus rhythm, then the trace will show the typical features of the
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia is rare in infants but may be seen
in later childhood and adolescence.
Extrasystoles
Atrial extrasystoles are very common and rarely associated with disease
Ventricular extrasystoles are also common and, in the context of the structurally normal
heart, are almost always benign
Typically, atrial and ventricular extrasystoles are abolished by exercise
Atrial flutter and fibrillation are rare in childhood and are usually associated with underlying
structural heart disease or previous cardiac surgery. Atrial flutter can present as an uncommon
arrhythmia in neonates with apparently otherwise normal hearts.
Aids for diagnosing tachycardias, such as atrioventricular dissociation and capture and
fusion beats, are less common in children than in adults
Although all forms of ventricular tachycardia are rare, broad complex tachycardia should be
considered to be ventricular tachycardia until proved otherwise. Bundle branch block (usually right
 6/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
bundle) often occurs after cardiac surgery, and a previous electrocardiogram can be helpful.
Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia may occur secondary to surgery for congenital heart disease.
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, or torsades de pointes, is associated with the long QT syndrome.
Complete atrioventricular block
Complete atrioventricular block may be congenital or secondary to surgery
An association exists between congenital complete atrioventricular block and maternal
anti-La and anti-Ro antibodies, which are believed to cross the placenta and damage
conduction tissue
Classification of atrioventricular block into first, second, and third degree follows the same principles
as for adults, although a diagnosis of first degree heart block should take into account the variation of
the PR interval with age. First degree heart block and the Wenckebach phenomenon may be a normal
finding in otherwise healthy children. First or second degree block, however, can occur with
rheumatic carditis, diphtheria, digoxin overdose, and congenital heart defects.
 7/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Normal 12 lead electrocardiogram from 3 day old baby boy showing right axis deviation,
dominant R wave in leads V4R and V1, and still predominantly upright T wave in V1.
 8/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Persistence of upright T waves in right precordial leads beyond first week of life is sign of
right ventricular hypertrophy
 9/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
 10/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Electrocardiogram from 12 year old (late childhood) (axis is now within normal “adult”
range and R wave is no longer dominant in right precordial leads)
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 3 year old with restrictive cardiomyopathy and severe right and left
atrial enlargement. Tall (>2.5 mm), wide P waves are clearly seen in lead II, and P wave in
V1 is markedly biphasic
 11/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 13 year old boy with transposition of great arteries and previous
Mustard's procedure. The right ventricle is the systemic ventricle and the trace shows right
ventricular hypertrophy with marked right axis deviation and a dominant R wave in the
right precordial leads
 12/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
 13/18

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
 14/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 11 year old girl with left ventricular hypertrophy secondary to
systemic hypertension. There are tall voltages in the left precordial and limb leads with
secondary ST depression and T wave inversion
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 3 year old girl with long QT syndrome
 15/18
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Prolongation of QT interval in association with T wave alternans (note alternating upright
and inverted T waves )
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 9 year old boy showing marked sinus arrhythmia, a common
finding in paediatric traces
 16/18
🔍
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram showing atrial “flutter” in 14 year old girl with congenital heart disease
and previous atrial surgery (in neonates with atrial flutter, 1:1 atrioventricular conduction is
more common, which may make P waves and diagnosis less evident)
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in 5 year old girl
 17/18
🔍
🔍

 Paediatric electrocardiography - PMC
Figure.
Open in a new tab
Electrocardiogram from 6 year old girl with congenital heart block secondary to maternal
antiphospholipid antibodies; there is complete atrioventricular dissociation, and the
ventricular escape rate is about 50 beats/min
Footnotes
The ABC of clinical electrocardiography is edited by Francis Morris, consultant in emergency
medicine at the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield; June Edhouse, consultant in emergency
medicine, Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport; William J Brady, associate professor, programme
director, and vice chair, department of emergency medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA, USA; and John Camm, professor of clinical cardiology, St George's Hospital Medical School,
London. The series will be published as a book in the summer.
Steve Goodacre is health services research fellow in the accident and emergency department at
the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield; and Karen McLeod is consultant paediatric cardiologist at
the Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow.
Articles from BMJ : British Medical Journal are provided here courtesy of BMJ Publishing Group
 18/18
🔍
