=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:50.759500",
  "file_size_bytes": 321684,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Palpitations
By Andrea D. Thompson, MD, PhD, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2024
Palpitations are the perception of cardiac activity. They are often described as a fluttering, racing, or
skipping sensation. They are common; some patients find them unpleasant and alarming. Palpitations
can occur in the absence of heart disease or can result from life-threatening heart disorders. The key to
diagnosis and treatment is to “capture” the rhythm on ECG and make careful observations during the
palpitations.
Pathophysiology of Palpitations
The mechanisms responsible for the sensation of palpitations are unknown. Ordinarily, sinus rhythm at
a normal rate is not perceived, and palpitations thus usually reflect changes in cardiac rate or rhythm. In
all cases, it is the abnormal movement of the heart within the chest that is felt. In cases of isolated
extrasystoles, the patient may actually perceive the augmented postextrasystolic beat as the “skipped”
beat rather than the premature beat itself, probably because the extrasystole blocks the next sinus beat
and allows longer ventricular filling and thus a higher stroke volume.
The clinical perception of cardiac phenomena is highly variable. Some patients are aware of virtually
every premature ventricular beat, but others are unaware of even complex atrial or ventricular
tachyarrhythmias. Awareness is heightened in patients who are sedentary, anxious, or depressed and
reduced in those who are active and happy. In some cases, palpitations are perceived in the absence of
any abnormal cardiac activity.
Etiology of Palpitations
Some patients simply have heightened awareness of normal cardiac activity, particularly when exercise,
febrile illness, or anxiety increases heart rate. However, diligent evaluation for arrhythmia as the cause
of palpitations is warranted. Arrhythmias range from benign to life threatening.
The most common arrhythmias include
Premature atrial contractions (PACs)
Premature ventricular contractions (PVCs)
Both of these arrhythmias usually are harmless.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 1/9
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Other common arrhythmias include
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT)
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter
Ventricular tachycardia
Bradyarrhythmias rarely cause patients to sense palpitations, although some patients are aware of the
slow rate.
Causes of arrhythmias
Some arrhythmias (eg, PACs, PVCs, PSVT) often occur spontaneously in patients without serious
underlying disorders, but others are often caused by a serious cardiac disorder.
Serious cardiac causes include myocardial ischemia or other myocardial disorders, congenital heart
disease (eg, Brugada syndrome, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, congenital long QT
syndrome, Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome), valvular heart disease, and conduction system
disturbances (eg, disturbances that cause bradycardia or heart block). Patients with orthostatic
hypotension commonly sense palpitations caused by sinus tachycardia upon standing.
Noncardiac disorders that increase myocardial contractility (eg, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma,
anxiety) may cause palpitations.
Some medications and drugs, including digitalis glycosides, caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and
sympathomimetics (eg, albuterol, amphetamines, cocaine, dobutamine, epinephrine, ephedrine,
isoproterenol, norepinephrine, and theophylline), frequently cause or exacerbate palpitations. Most
antiarrhythmic medications themselves can cause arrhythmias.
Metabolic disturbances, including anemia, hypoxia, hypovolemia, and electrolyte abnormalities (eg,
diuretic-induced hypokalemia), can trigger or exacerbate palpitations.
Consequences
Many arrhythmias that cause palpitations have no adverse physiologic consequences of their own (ie,
independent of the underlying disorder). However, bradyarrhythmias, tachyarrhythmias, and heart
blocks can be unpredictable and may adversely affect cardiac output and cause hypotension or death.
Ventricular tachycardia sometimes degenerates to ventricular fibrillation.
Evaluation of Palpitations
A complete history and physical examination are essential. Observations by other medical personnel or
reliable observers should be sought.
History
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 2/9
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
History of present illness should cover the frequency and duration of palpitations and provoking or
exacerbating factors (eg, emotional distress, activity, change in position, intake of caffeine or other
medications or drugs). Important associated symptoms include syncope, light-headedness, tunnel
vision, dyspnea, and chest pain. Asking the patient to tap out the rate and cadence of palpitations is
better than a verbal description and often suggests a diagnosis, as in the “missed beat” of atrial or
ventricular extrasystoles or the rapid total irregularity of atrial fibrillation.
Review of systems should cover symptoms of causative disorders, including heat intolerance, weight
loss, and tremor (hyperthyroidism); chest pain and dyspnea on exertion (myocardial ischemia); and
fatigue, weakness, heavy vaginal bleeding, and/or dark tar-like stools (anemia).
Past medical history should identify known potential causes, including documented arrhythmias and
heart or thyroid disorders. Family history should note occurrences of syncope (sometimes mistakenly
described as seizures) or sudden death at an early age.
The drug profile should be reviewed for offending prescription medications (eg, antiarrhythmics,
digoxin, beta-agonists, theophylline, and rate-limiting drugs); over-the-counter medications (eg, cold and
sinus medications, dietary supplements containing stimulants), including alternative medicines; and
illicit drugs (eg, cocaine, methamphetamines). Caffeine (eg, coffee, tea, numerous soft drinks and energy
drinks), alcohol, and tobacco use should be determined.
Physical examination
The general examination should note whether an anxious demeanor or psychomotor agitation is
present. Vital signs are reviewed for fever, hypertension, hypotension, tachycardia, bradycardia,
tachypnea, and low oxygen saturation. Orthostatic changes in blood pressure (BP) and heart rate should
be measured.
Examination of the head and neck should note any abnormality or dyssynchrony of the jugular pulse
waves compared with the carotid pulse or auscultated heart rhythm and findings of hyperthyroidism,
such as thyroid enlargement or tenderness and exophthalmos. The conjunctivae, palmar creases, and
buccal mucosa should be inspected for pallor.
Cardiac auscultation should note the rate and regularity of the rhythm as well as any murmurs or
extra heart sounds that might indicate underlying valvular or structural heart disease.
Neurologic examination should note whether resting tremors or brisk reflexes are present (suggesting
excess sympathetic stimulation). An abnormal neurologic finding suggests that seizures rather than a
cardiac disorder may be the cause if syncope is one of the symptoms.
Red flags
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
Light-headedness or syncope (particularly if injury occurs as a result of syncope)
Chest pain
Dyspnea
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 3/9
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
New onset of irregularly irregular heart rhythm
Heart rate >120 beats/minute or < 45 beats/minute while at rest
Significant underlying heart disease
Family history of recurrent syncope or sudden death
Exercise-induced palpitations or, particularly, exercise-induced syncope
Interpretation of findings
History (see table Suggestive Historical Findings in Patients With Palpitations) and, to a lesser extent,
physical examination provide clues to the diagnosis.
Palpation of the arterial pulse and cardiac auscultation may reveal a rhythm disturbance. However, the
examination is not always diagnostic of a specific rhythm, except when it identifies the unique irregular
irregularity of some cases of rapid atrial fibrillation, the regular irregularity of coupled atrial or
ventricular extrasystoles, the regular tachycardia at 150 beats/minute of PSVT, and the regular
bradycardia of < 35 beats/minute of complete atrioventricular block.
Careful examination of the jugular venous pulse waves simultaneously with cardiac auscultation and
palpation of the carotid artery allows evaluation of atrial rhythm through jugular waves while the
auscultated sounds or the pulse in the carotids are the product of ventricular contraction.
Thyroid enlargement or tenderness with exophthalmos suggests thyrotoxicosis. Marked hypertension
and regular tachycardia are consistent with pheochromocytoma.
TABLE
Suggestive Historical Findings in Patients With Palpitations
Finding Possible Cause
Occasional skipped beats PACs, PVCs
Rapid, regular palpitations with sudden
PSVT, atrial flutter with 2:1
onset and termination
atrioventricular block, VT
Often history of recurrence
Sinus node dysfunction, atrioventricular
bypass tract (such as in Wolff-Parkinson-
Syncope following palpitations White syndrome), congenital long QT
syndrome, VT, atrial fibrillation, atrial
flutter
Palpitations during exercise or an Sinus tachycardia (particularly in healthy
emotional episode people)
Ventricular arrhythmia from exercise-
induced ischemia (particularly in people
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 4/9
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Finding Possible Cause
with congenital arrhythmic disorders or
CAD)
Palpitations following episodic* drug use Drug-induced cause
Suggests (but does not confirm) a
Sense of doom, anxiety, or panic
psychological factor
Sinus tachycardia (eg, due to infection,
Recent surgery (postoperative period) bleeding, pulmonary embolism, pain),
atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter
Supraventricular arrhythmia (eg,
atrioventricular nodal reentrant bypass
tract, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome)
Recurrent episodes since childhood
Congenital long QT syndrome (usually
manifests during adolescence)
Brugada syndrome, congenital long QT
syndrome, inherited dilated
Family history of syncope or sudden
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right
death
ventricular cardiomyopathy, or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
* The role of regular use of drugs (particularly medications) or substances (eg, daily caffeine)
can be hard to determine; sometimes a trial of withdrawal is diagnostic. All drugs with
cardiovascular effects, most psychoactive drugs, and drugs capable of causing hypokalemia
or hypomagnesemia must be suspected.
CAD = coronary artery disease; PACs = premature atrial contractions; PSVT = paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia; PVCs = premature ventricular contractions; VT = ventricular
tachycardia.
Testing
Testing typically is done:
ECG, sometimes with ambulatory monitoring
Laboratory testing
Sometimes imaging studies, stress testing, or both
ECG is done, but unless the recording is done while symptoms are occurring, it may not provide a
diagnosis. Many cardiac arrhythmias are intermittent and show no fixed ECG abnormalities; exceptions
include
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 5/9
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Long QT syndrome
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
Brugada syndrome and its variants
If no diagnosis is apparent and symptoms are frequent, Holter monitoring for 24 to 48 hours is useful;
for intermittent symptoms, an event recorder worn for longer periods and activated by the patient
when symptoms are felt is better. These tests are used mainly when a sustained arrhythmia is
suspected, rather than when symptoms suggest only occasional skipped beats. Patients with very
infrequent symptoms that clinicians suspect represent a serious arrhythmia may have a device
implanted beneath the skin of the upper chest. This device, often called a loop recorder, continuously
records the rhythm and can be interrogated by an external machine that allows the cardiac rhythm to
be printed. Finally, a variety of commercially available products that patients may be using may provide
additional useful information. These products include fitness trackers, which monitor heart rate, and
mobile ECG monitors that are available for phones and watches.
Laboratory testing is needed in all patients. All patients should have a complete blood count and
measurement of serum electrolytes, including magnesium and calcium. Further testing should be aimed
at suspected causes. The cardiac biomarker troponin should be measured in patients with ongoing
arrhythmias, chest discomfort, or other symptoms suggesting active or recent coronary ischemia,
myocarditis, or pericarditis.
Thyroid function tests are indicated when atrial fibrillation is newly diagnosed or there are symptoms of
hyperthyroidism. Patients with paroxysms of high BP should be evaluated for pheochromocytoma.
Sometimes tilt-table testing is done in patients with postural syncope.
Imaging is sometimes needed. Patients with newly diagnosed arrhythmia, findings suggesting cardiac
dysfunction or findings suggesting structural heart disease require echocardiography and sometimes
cardiac MRI. Patients with symptoms on exertion require stress testing sometimes with stress
echocardiography, nuclear scanning, or PET.
Treatment of Palpitations
Precipitating medications and substances that can cause syncope are stopped. If dangerous or
debilitating arrhythmias are caused by a necessary medication, a different medication should be tried.
For isolated PACs and PVCs in patients without structural heart disease, simple reassurance is
appropriate. For otherwise healthy patients in whom these phenomena are disabling, a beta-blocker
can be given provided efforts are made to avoid reinforcing the perception by anxious patients that they
have a serious disorder.
Identified rhythm disturbances and underlying disorders are investigated and treated (see table Some
Treatments for Arrhythmias). However, for rapid tachyarrhythmias in a patient in hemodynamic
distress, cardioversion should precede further diagnostic assessment.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 6/9
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
TABLE
Some Treatments for Arrhythmias
Disorder Treatment*
Narrow complex tachycardias
Reassurance, a non-dihydropyridine
Multifocal atrial extrasystoles calcium channel blockers, or a beta-
blocker
Anticoagulation
For rate control:
Beta-blockers
Verapamil
Diltiazem
Digoxin
Atrial fibrillation
For rhythm control:
Antiarrhythmic medications (eg,
ibutilide, amiodarone, propafenone,
dronedarone, sotalol, dofetilide)
Cardioversion
Radioablation
Sometimes a Maze procedure
Anticoagulation
Radioablation (often the best treatment)
Atrial flutter
Sometimes DC cardioversion, digoxin,
beta blocker, and/or verapamil
Sometimes, DC cardioversion, rate
Ectopic supraventricular tachycardia (eg, control medications (excluding digoxin) ,
atrial tachycardia) antiarrhythmics, overdrive pacing,
and/or ablation
Vagotonic maneuvers
Reentrant supraventricular tachycardias
AV nodal blocking medications (eg, beta
(eg atrioventricular nodal reentrant
blockers, verapamil)
tachycardia)
Ablation (often the best treatment)
Broad complex tachycardias
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 7/9
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Disorder Treatment*
Immediate pharmacotherapy or DC
cardioversion
Amiodarone, sotalol, propafenone,
Ventricular tachycardia
lidocaine, mexiletine, flecainide,
radioablation
Sometimes an implanted defibrillator
If unstable, immediate DC cardioversion,
magnesium, and/or potassium;
sometimes an implanted defibrillator
Ongoing treatment as needed with
Torsade de pointes
magnesium, potassium, a beta-blocker,
isoproterenol, or overdrive cardiac
pacing
Sometimes an implanted defibrillator
Defibrillation
Sometimes medications (eg,
Ventricular fibrillation
amiodarone)
Sometimes an implanted defibrillator
Usually DC cardioversion or an
Brugada syndrome
implanted defibrillator
* Always identify and correct causes and exacerbating factors (eg, electrolyte abnormalities,
hypoxemia, drugs).
AV = atrioventricular; DC = direct current.
Geriatrics Essentials: Palpitations
Older adults are at particular risk of adverse effects of antiarrhythmics; reasons include lower
glomerular filtration rate and concomitant use of other medications. When pharmacotherapy is needed,
lower doses should be used to start. Subclinical conduction abnormalities may be present (recognized
on ECG or other studies), which might worsen with use of antiarrhythmics; such patients may require a
pacemaker to allow the use of antiarrhythmics.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 8/9
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Palpitations - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Palpitations are a frequent but relatively nonspecific symptom.
Palpitations are not a reliable indicator of a significant arrhythmia, but palpitations in a
patient with structural heart disease or an abnormal ECG may be a sign of a serious
problem and warrant investigation.
An ECG or other recording done during symptoms is invaluable; a normal ECG in a
symptom-free interval does not rule out significant disease.
Most antiarrhythmics themselves can cause arrhythmias.
If in doubt about a rapid tachyarrhythmia in a patient in hemodynamic distress,
cardiovert first and ask questions later.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/symptoms-of-cardiovascular-disorders/palpitations 9/9
