=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:36.018002",
  "file_size_bytes": 1176920,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Pericarditis
By Brian D. Hoit, MD, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised May 2024
Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardium, often with fluid accumulation in
the pericardial space. Pericarditis may be caused by many disorders (eg,
infection, myocardial infarction, trauma, tumors, metabolic disorders) but is
often idiopathic. Symptoms include chest pain or tightness, often worsened by
deep breathing. Cardiac output may be greatly reduced if cardiac tamponade or
constrictive pericarditis develops. Diagnosis is based on symptoms, a friction
rub, electrocardiographic changes, and evidence of pericardial fluid
accumulation on x-ray or echocardiogram. Finding the cause requires further
evaluation. Treatment depends on the cause, but general measures include
analgesics, anti-inflammatory medications, colchicine, and rarely surgery.
Pericarditis is the most common pericardial disorder. Congenital pericardial disorders are rare.
Anatomy in Pericarditis
The pericardium has 2 layers (1). The visceral pericardium is a single layer of mesothelial cells that is
attached to the myocardium, folds back (reflects) on itself over the origin of the great vessels, and joins
with a tough, fibrous layer to envelop the heart as the parietal pericardium. The sac created by these
layers contains a small amount of fluid (< 25 to 50 mL), composed mostly of an ultrafiltrate of plasma.
The pericardium limits acute cardiac distention and enhances the mechanical interactions of the cardiac
chambers.
The pericardium is richly innervated with sympathetic and somatic afferents. Stretch-sensitive
mechanoreceptors sense changes in cardiac volume and tension and may be responsible for
transmitting pericardial pain. The phrenic nerves are embedded in the parietal pericardium and are
vulnerable to injury during surgery on the pericardium.
Anatomy reference
1. Hoit BD. Anatomy and Physiology of the Pericardium. Cardiol Clin 2017;35(4):481-490.
doi:10.1016/j.ccl.2017.07.002
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 1/21
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Pathophysiology of Pericarditis
Pericarditis may be
Acute
Subacute
Chronic
Acute pericarditis develops quickly, causing inflammation of the pericardial sac and often a pericardial
effusion. Inflammation can extend to the epicardial myocardium (myopericarditis). Adverse
hemodynamic effects and rhythm disturbances are rare, although cardiac tamponade is possible.
Acute disease may resolve completely, resolve and reoccur (up to 30% of acute cases) or become
subacute or chronic (1). These forms develop more slowly.
Subacute pericarditis occurs within weeks to months of an inciting event and may resolve
spontaneously or with medical therapy.
Chronic pericarditis is defined as pericarditis persisting > 6 months.
Pericardial effusion is accumulation of fluid in the pericardium. The fluid may be serous fluid
(sometimes with fibrin strands), serosanguineous fluid, blood, pus, or chyle.
Cardiac tamponade occurs when a moderate or large pericardial effusion impairs cardiac filling,
leading to low cardiac output and sometimes shock and death. If fluid (usually blood) accumulates
rapidly, even small amounts (eg, 150 mL) may cause tamponade because the pericardium cannot
stretch quickly enough to accommodate it. Conversely, slow accumulation of up to 1500 mL may not
cause tamponade. Loculated effusion may cause localized tamponade on the right or left side of the
heart and may be difficult to diagnose.
Occasionally, pericarditis causes a marked thickening and stiffening of the pericardium (constrictive
pericarditis).
Constrictive pericarditis, which is now less common than in the past, results from marked
inflammatory, fibrotic thickening of the pericardium. Sometimes the visceral and parietal layers adhere
to each other or to the myocardium. The fibrotic tissue often contains calcium deposits. The stiff,
thickened pericardium markedly impairs ventricular filling, decreasing stroke volume and cardiac
output. Significant pericardial fluid accumulation is rare. Rhythm disturbance is common, particularly
atrial fibrillation. The diastolic pressures in the ventricles, atria, and venous beds become virtually the
same. Systemic venous congestion occurs, causing considerable transudation of fluid from systemic
capillaries, with dependent edema and, later, ascites. Chronic elevation of systemic venous pressure
and hepatic venous pressure may lead to liver scarring, called cardiac cirrhosis, in which case, patients
may initially present for evaluation of cirrhosis. Constriction of the left atrium, the left ventricle, or both
may elevate pulmonary venous pressure. Occasionally, pleural effusion develops.
There are several variants of constrictive pericarditis:
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 2/21
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Chronic constrictive pericarditis, usually requiring pericardiectomy as definitive treatment
Subacute (early stage) constrictive pericarditis, developing weeks to months after an inciting
injury and managed initially with medical therapy
Transient constrictive pericarditis (typically subacute) is that which resolves spontaneously
or after medical therapy
Effusive-constrictive pericarditis characterized by pericardial constriction involving the
visceral pericardium with significant pericardial effusion sometimes requiring treatment for
cardiac tamponade
Pathophysiology reference
1. Imazio M, Gaita F, LeWinter M. Evaluation and Treatment of Pericarditis: A Systematic Review
[published correction appears in JAMA 2015 Nov 10;314(18):1978] [published correction appears in
JAMA 2016 Jan 5;315(1):90. Dosage error in article text]. JAMA 2015;314(14):1498-1506.
doi:10.1001/jama.2015.12763
Etiology of Pericarditis
Acute pericarditis may result from infection, autoimmune or inflammatory disorders, uremia, trauma,
myocardial infarction (MI), cancer, radiation therapy, or certain medications (see table Causes of Acute
Pericarditis).
Infectious pericarditis is most often viral or idiopathic (often presumed to be viral). Purulent bacterial
pericarditis is uncommon but may follow infective endocarditis, pneumonia, septicemia, penetrating
trauma, or cardiac surgery. Often, the cause cannot be identified (called nonspecific or idiopathic
pericarditis), but many of these cases are probably viral.
Acute myocardial infarction causes 7 to 12% of cases of acute pericarditis (1). Post-myocardial infarction
syndrome (Dressler syndrome) is a less common cause, occurring mainly when reperfusion with
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) or thrombolytic drugs is ineffective in patients
with transmural infarction (2). Pericarditis occurs after pericardiotomy (called postpericardiotomy
syndrome) in 5 to 30% of cardiac operations (3). Postpericardiotomy syndrome, post-MI syndrome, and
traumatic pericarditis (which includes iatrogenic pericarditis, after, eg, percutaneous cardiac
intervention, pacemaker placement, and ablation) comprise the post-cardiac injury syndrome.
TABLE
Causes of Acute Pericarditis
Cause Examples
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic rheumatic diseases Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Systemic sclerosis
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 3/21
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Gram-negative bacilli
Haemophilus influenzae (in children)
Lyme disease
Bacterial infections Rheumatic fever
Staphylococci
Streptococci
Tuberculosis*
Breast cancer
Kaposi sarcoma (in people with HIV
infection)
Cancer
Leukemia
Lung cancer
Anticoagulants
Hydralazine
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
Isoniazid
Medications
Methysergide
Penicillin
Phenytoin
Procainamide
Blastomycosis
Candidiasis
Fungal infections
Coccidioidomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Idiopathic —
Amyloidosis
Inflammatory disorders Inflammatory bowel disease
Sarcoidosis
Myocardial infarction —
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 4/21
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Amebiasis
Parasitic infections Echinococcosis
Toxoplasmosis
Post-myocardial infarction (Dressler)
—
syndrome
Postpericardiotomy syndrome —
Radiation therapy —
Trauma —
Uremia —
Coxsackie B virus
Echovirus
Viral infections HIV†
Influenza virus
SARS-CoV-2
* Tuberculous pericarditis accounts for a small percentage of cases of acute or subacute
pericarditis in the United States but the majority of cases in some areas of India and Africa.
† If patients with HIV infection develop lymphoma, Kaposi sarcoma, or certain infections (eg,
Mycobacterium avium, M. tuberculosis, or Nocardia infections; other fungal or viral infections),
pericarditis may follow.
Subacute pericarditis is a prolongation of acute pericarditis and thus has the same causes. Some
patients have transient constriction occurring days to weeks after recovery from acute pericarditis.
Chronic pericarditis with pericardial effusion or chronic constrictive pericarditis may follow acute
pericarditis of almost any etiology. In high-resource areas, the most common antecedents of
constrictive pericarditis are idiopathic/viral, prior cardiac surgery, and history of radiation therapy; the
most common cause worldwide is tuberculous pericarditis (4). In addition, some cases occur without
antecedent acute pericarditis.
Chronic pericarditis with large effusion (serous, serosanguineous, or bloody) is most commonly caused
by metastatic tumors (5), most often by lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, sarcoma, melanoma,
leukemia, or lymphoma.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 5/21
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Hypothyroidism may cause pericardial effusion and cholesterol pericarditis. Cholesterol pericarditis is a
rare disorder that may be associated with myxedema, in which a chronic pericardial effusion has a high
level of cholesterol that triggers inflammation and pericarditis.
Sometimes no cause of chronic pericarditis is identified.
Transient constrictive pericarditis is most commonly caused by infection or postpericardiotomy
inflammation or is idiopathic.
Fibrosis of the pericardium, sometimes leading to chronic constrictive pericarditis, may follow
purulent pericarditis or accompany a systemic rheumatic disease. In older patients, common causes are
malignant tumors, MI, and tuberculosis. Hemopericardium (accumulation of blood within the
pericardium) may lead to pericarditis or pericardial fibrosis; common causes include chest trauma,
iatrogenic injury (eg, resulting from cardiac catheterization, pacemaker insertion, central venous line
placement), and rupture of a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Etiology references
1. Lador A, Hasdai D, Mager A, et al. Incidence and Prognosis of Pericarditis After ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction (from the Acute Coronary Syndrome Israeli Survey 2000 to 2013 Registry
Database). Am J Cardiol 2018;121(6):690-694. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2017.12.006
2. Shahar A, Hod H, Barabash GM, Kaplinsky E, Motro M. Disappearance of a syndrome: Dressler's
syndrome in the era of thrombolysis. Cardiology 1994;85(3-4):255-258. doi:10.1159/000176683
3. Lehto J, Kiviniemi T. Postpericardiotomy syndrome after cardiac surgery. Ann Med
2020;52(6):243-264. doi:10.1080/07853890.2020.1758339
4. Janus SE, Hoit BD. Effusive-constrictive pericarditis in the spectrum of pericardial compressive
syndromes [published correction appears in Heart 2021 Nov;107(22):e17]. Heart Published online
January 15, 2021. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2020-316664
5. Corey GR, Campbell PT, Van Trigt P, et al. Etiology of large pericardial effusions. Am J Med
1993;95(2):209-213. doi:10.1016/0002-9343(93)90262-n
Symptoms and Signs of Pericarditis
Some patients present with symptoms and signs of inflammation (acute pericarditis); others present
with those of fluid accumulation (pericardial effusion) or constriction.
Symptoms and signs vary depending on the severity of inflammation and the amount and rate of fluid
accumulation. Even a large amount of pericardial fluid may be asymptomatic if it develops slowly (eg,
over months).
Acute pericarditis
Acute pericarditis tends to cause chest pain, fever, and a pericardial rub, sometimes with dyspnea. The
first evidence can be tamponade, with hypotension, shock, or pulmonary edema.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 6/21
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
AUDIO
Pericardial Friction Rub
Because the innervation of the pericardium and myocardium is the same, the chest pain of pericarditis
is sometimes similar to that of myocardial inflammation or ischemia: Dull or sharp precordial or
substernal pain may radiate to the neck, trapezius ridge (especially the left), or shoulders. Pain ranges
from mild to severe. Unlike chest pain due to ischemia, pain due to pericarditis is usually aggravated by
thoracic motion, cough, breathing, or swallowing food; it may be relieved by sitting up and leaning
forward.
Tachypnea and nonproductive cough may be present; fever, chills, and weakness are common. In 15 to
25% of patients with idiopathic pericarditis, symptoms recur intermittently for months or years
(recurrent pericarditis).
The most important physical finding is a triphasic or a systolic and diastolic precordial friction rub.
However, the rub is often intermittent and evanescent; it may be present only during systole or, less
frequently, only during diastole. Sometimes, a pleural component to the rub is noted during breathing,
which is due to inflammation of the pleura adjacent to the pericardium.
Pericardial effusion
Pericardial effusion is often painless, but when it occurs with acute pericarditis, pain may be present.
Considerable amounts of pericardial fluid may muffle heart sounds, increase the area of cardiac
dullness, and change the size and shape of the cardiac silhouette. A pericardial rub may be heard. With
large effusions, compression of the base of the left lung can decrease breath sounds (heard near the
left scapula) and cause crackles. Arterial pulse, jugular venous pulse, and blood pressure are normal
unless intrapericardial pressure increases substantially, causing tamponade.
In post-MI syndrome, pericardial effusion can occur with fever, friction rub, pleurisy, pleural effusions,
and joint pain. This syndrome usually occurs within 10 days to 2 months after MI. It is usually mild but
may be severe. Occasionally, the heart ruptures post-MI, causing hemopericardium and tamponade,
usually 1 to 10 days post-MI and more commonly in females.
Cardiac tamponade
(See also Cardiac tamponade due to trauma.)
The clinical findings of cardiac tamponade are similar to those of cardiogenic shock: decreased cardiac
output, low systemic arterial pressure, tachycardia, and dyspnea. Neck veins are markedly dilated.
Severe cardiac tamponade is nearly always accompanied by a fall of > 10 mm Hg in systolic blood
pressure during inspiration (pulsus paradoxus). In advanced cases, pulse may disappear during
inspiration. (However, pulsus paradoxus can also occur in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD], bronchial asthma, pulmonary embolism, right ventricular infarction, and noncardiogenic shock.)
Heart sounds are muffled unless the effusion is small. Loculated effusions and eccentric or localized
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 7/21
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
hematoma may cause localized tamponade, in which only selected cardiac chambers are compressed.
In these cases, physical, hemodynamic, and some echocardiographic signs may be absent.
Constrictive pericarditis
Fibrosis or calcification rarely causes symptoms unless constrictive pericarditis develops. The only early
abnormalities may be elevated ventricular diastolic, atrial, pulmonary, and systemic venous pressures.
Symptoms and signs of peripheral venous congestion (eg, peripheral edema, neck vein distention,
hepatomegaly) may appear with an early diastolic sound (pericardial knock), often best heard during
inspiration. This sound is due to abrupt slowing of diastolic ventricular filling by the rigid pericardium.
AUDIO
Diastolic Knock
Ventricular systolic function (based on ejection fraction) is usually preserved. Prolonged elevation of
pulmonary venous pressure results in dyspnea (particularly during exertion) and orthopnea. Fatigue
may be severe. Distention of neck veins with a rise in venous pressure during inspiration (Kussmaul
sign) is present; it is absent in tamponade. Pulsus paradoxus is rare and is usually less severe than in
tamponade. Lungs are not congested unless severe left ventricular constriction develops.
Diagnosis of Pericarditis
Electrocardiography (ECG) and chest radiograph
Echocardiography
Tests to identify cause (eg, pericardial fluid aspiration, pericardial biopsy)
ECG and chest radiograph are done. Echocardiography is done to check for effusion, cardiac filling
abnormalities that may suggest cardiac tamponade, and wall motion abnormalities characteristic of
myocardial involvement. Blood tests may detect leukocytosis and elevated markers of inflammation (eg,
C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate), which may be used to guide duration of therapy.
Acute pericarditis
The diagnosis is based on the presence of the following clinical findings and ECG abnormalities (1);
these findings are not present in all cases.
Characteristic chest pain
Pericardial rub
ECG abnormalities
Pericardial effusion
Serial ECGs may be needed to show abnormalities. The ECG in acute pericarditis may show
abnormalities confined to ST and PR segments and T waves, usually in most leads. (ECG changes in lead
aVR are generally in the opposite direction of other leads.) Unlike MI, acute pericarditis does not cause
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 8/21
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
reciprocal depression in ST segments (except in leads aVR and V1), and there are no pathologic Q waves.
ECG changes in pericarditis can occur in 4 stages although not all stages are present in all cases.
Stage 1: ST segments show upward concave elevation; the PR segments may be depressed
(see figure Acute Pericarditis: Stage 1 ECG).
Stage 2: ST segments return to baseline; T waves flatten.
Stage 3: T waves are inverted throughout the ECG; T wave–inversion occurs after the ST
segment has returned to baseline and thus differs from the pattern of acute ischemia or MI.
Stage 4: T wave changes resolve.
Echocardiography in acute pericarditis typically shows an effusion, which helps confirm the diagnosis,
except in patients with purely fibrinous acute pericarditis in whom echocardiography is often normal.
Findings indicating myocardial involvement include new focal or diffuse left ventricular dysfunction.
Cardiac MRI can detect the presence, severity, and acuity of pericardial inflammation but is generally not
required to diagnose acute pericarditis. MRI can identify extension of inflammation into the subjacent
myocardium (myopericarditis), which occurs in up to 15 to 24% of cases. Unlike perimyocarditis (isolated
or prevalent myocarditis), there is no identified adverse long-term outcome (2).
Acute Pericarditis: Stage 1 ECG
J points, except aVR and V , are elevated. T waves are essentially normal. ST segments show
1
upward concave elevation. PR segments, except aVR and V , are depressed. PR deviations are
1
commonly absent in one limb lead (here, aVL).
Because the pain of pericarditis may resemble that of acute MI or pulmonary infarction, additional tests
(eg, serum cardiac biomarker measurement, lung scan) may be required if the history and ECG findings
are atypical for pericarditis. Troponin is often elevated in acute pericarditis due to epicardial
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 9/21
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
inflammation, so it cannot discriminate between pericarditis, acute infarction, and pulmonary
embolism. Very high levels of troponin may indicate myopericarditis. The CK-MB (creatine kinase muscle
band isoenzyme) level, which is less sensitive than the troponin level, is usually normal in acute
pericarditis unless myocarditis is also present.
Postpericardiotomy and post-MI syndromes may be difficult to identify and must be distinguished from
recent MI, pulmonary embolism, and pericardial infection after surgery. Pain, friction rub, and fever
appearing 2 weeks to several months after surgery and a rapid response to aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine, or corticosteroids aids diagnosis.
Pericardial effusion
Diagnosis is suggested by clinical findings but often is suspected only after finding an enlarged cardiac
silhouette on chest radiograph. On ECG, QRS voltage is often decreased, and sinus rhythm remains in
most patients. With large, chronic effusions, the ECG may show electrical alternans (ie, P, QRS, or T wave
amplitude increases and decreases on alternate beats). Electrical alternans is associated with variation
in cardiac position (swinging heart).
Chest Radiograph of a Patient with Pericardial Effusion
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Echocardiography estimates the volume of pericardial fluid; identifies cardiac tamponade, sometimes
acute myocarditis, and/or heart failure; and may suggest the cause of pericarditis.
Although CT can detect a pericardial effusion (often incidentally on a scan done for other conditions), it
may overestimate its size and is not a first-line test to evaluate possible pericardial effusion.
Patients with a normal ECG, small (< 1 cm on echocardiogram, or 100 mL) effusion, and no suspicious
findings from the history and examination may be observed with serial examination and
echocardiography. Other patients must be evaluated further to determine etiology.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 10/21
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Constrictive pericarditis
Diagnosis may be suspected based on clinical, ECG, chest x-ray, and Doppler echocardiography findings,
but cardiac catheterization and CT (or MRI) are often required. Rarely, right heart biopsy is needed to
exclude restrictive cardiomyopathy.
ECG changes are nonspecific. QRS voltage is usually low. T waves are usually nonspecifically abnormal.
Atrial fibrillation occurs in about one third of patients; atrial flutter is less common.
Lateral chest x-ray often shows pericardial calcification best, but the finding is nonspecific.
Chest Radiograph of a Patient with Constrictive Pericarditis
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Echocardiography also is nonspecific. When the right and left ventricular filling pressures are equally
elevated, Doppler echocardiography helps distinguish constrictive pericarditis from restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
During inspiration, mitral diastolic flow velocity usually falls > 25% in constrictive pericarditis
but < 15% in restrictive cardiomyopathy.
In constrictive pericarditis, inspiratory tricuspid flow velocity increases more than it
normally does, but it does not do so in restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Determining tissue velocities at the mitral annulus may be helpful when excessively high left atrial
pressure blunts respiratory variation in transvalvular velocities. Mitral annular velocities (especially at
the septal location) increase in constrictive pericarditis; they decrease in restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Presence of a septal bounce (shift of the interventricular septum towards the left ventricle during
inspiration and away from the left ventricle during expiration) and hepatic vein expiratory diastolic flow
reversal (which occurs due to a dissociation of intracardiac and intrathoracic pressures and enhanced
ventricular interaction) can also be visible in constrictive pericarditis.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 11/21
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Respiration-related ventricular septal shift, preserved or increased medial annular velocity, and hepatic
vein expiratory diastolic flow reversal collectively are referred to as the Mayo criteria, but each factor is
independently associated with constrictive pericarditis (3).
Cardiac catheterization, right and left sided, is done if clinical and echocardiographic findings suggest
constrictive pericarditis. Cardiac catheterization helps confirm and quantify the abnormal
hemodynamics that define constrictive pericarditis:
Mean pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure),
pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, right ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and mean
right atrial pressure are roughly equal, all at about 10 to 30 mm Hg.
The pulmonary artery and right ventricular systolic pressures are normal or modestly
elevated, so that pulse pressures are small.
In the atrial pressure curve, x and y descents are typically accentuated.
In the ventricular pressure curve, a diastolic dip occurs at the time of rapid ventricular
filling.
During peak inspiration, right ventricular pressure increases when left ventricular pressure
is lowest (sometimes called mirror-image discordance, suggesting increased ventricular
interdependence).
Because ventricular filling is restricted, ventricular pressure tracings show a sudden dip
followed by a plateau (resembling a square root sign) in early diastole.
Measuring these changes requires simultaneous right and left heart cardiac catheterization, using
separate transducers. These hemodynamic changes almost always occur with significant constrictive
pericarditis but may be masked during hypovolemia.
Right ventricular systolic pressure of > 50 mm Hg often occurs in restrictive cardiomyopathy but less
often in constrictive pericarditis. When the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure equals the right atrial
mean pressure and an early diastolic dip in the ventricular pressure curve occurs with large x and y
waves in the right atrial curve, either disorder may be present.
CT or MRI can identify pericardial thickening > 5 mm.
Pericardial thickening > 4-mm, with typical hemodynamic changes (assessed by
echocardiography and catheterization), can confirm constrictive pericarditis (2).
When no pericardial thickening or fluid is seen, the diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy
is favored but not proved.
A normal pericardial thickness does not exclude constrictive pericarditis.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 12/21
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
CT Scan of a Patient with Constrictive Pericarditis
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Increased T2-weighted short TI inversion recovery (STIR) signal and late gadolinium enhancement on
cardiac MRI can document active inflammation and resolution of constriction in response to anti-
inflammatory therapy, whereas their absence suggests chronic constrictive pericarditis that is unlikely to
be responsive to medical therapy. The degree of late gadolinium enhancement of the pericardium may
be especially helpful in identifying patients in whom constriction will reverse or resolve.
Cardiac tamponade
Low voltage and electrical alternans on the ECG suggest cardiac tamponade, but these findings lack
sensitivity and specificity (4). When tamponade is suspected, echocardiography is done unless even a
brief delay might be life threatening. Then pericardiocentesis is done immediately for diagnosis and
treatment. Echocardiographic findings that support tamponade include the following (5):
Respiratory variation of transvalvular and venous flows
Compression or collapse of right cardiac chambers in the presence of a pericardial effusion
Inferior vena caval plethora (decrease in the proximal vena caval diameter by < 50% during
deep inspiration)
However, cardiac tamponade is primarily a clinical diagnosis.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Significant cardiac tamponade is a clinical diagnosis; echocardiographic findings alone are
not an indication for pericardiocentesis.
If tamponade is suspected but not yet confirmed (eg, by clinical findings and echocardiography), right
heart (Swan-Ganz) catheterization may be done. In cardiac tamponade:
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 13/21
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
There is no early diastolic dip in the ventricular pressure record.
Diastolic pressures are elevated (about 10 to 30 mm Hg) and equal in all cardiac chambers
and in the pulmonary artery.
In the atrial pressure curve, x descent is preserved and y descent is lost.
In contrast, in severe congestive states due to dilated cardiomyopathy, pulmonary artery occlusion or
left ventricular diastolic pressure usually exceeds right atrial mean pressure and right ventricular
diastolic pressure by ≥ 4 mm Hg.
Right heart catheterization should be considered particularly when draining an effusion, not only to
confirm tamponade, but also to uncover possible constrictive pericarditis with effusion.
Diagnosis of cause
After pericarditis is diagnosed, tests to determine etiology and the effect on cardiac function are done.
In a young, previously healthy adult who presents with a viral infection and acute pericarditis, an
extensive evaluation is usually unnecessary. Differentiating viral from idiopathic pericarditis is difficult,
can involve extensive testing, and generally of little practical importance.
In other cases, a biopsy of pericardial tissue or aspiration of pericardial fluid may be needed to establish
a diagnosis. Acid-fast stains and cultures of pericardial fluid are essential if tuberculosis (TB) is
considered possible (TB pericarditis can be aggressive and can worsen rapidly with corticosteroid
therapy). Samples are examined for malignant cells. Persistent (usually > 3 months) or progressive
effusion, particularly when the etiology is uncertain, also warrants pericardiocentesis.
The choice between needle pericardiocentesis and surgical drainage depends on institutional resources
and physician experience, the etiology of the effusion, the need for diagnostic tissue samples, and the
prognosis of the patient. Needle pericardiocentesis is often best when the etiology is known or the
presence of tamponade is in question. Surgical drainage is best when the presence of tamponade is
certain but (because pericardial biopsy can be done surgically) the etiology is unclear.
Laboratory test results of pericardial fluid other than culture and cytology are usually nonspecific. But
specific diagnoses are sometimes possible using newer visual, cytologic, and immunologic analysis of
fluid obtained via pericardioscopic-guided biopsy.
Cardiac catheterization may be useful for evaluating pericarditis and identifying the cause of reduced
cardiac function.
CT or MRI can help identify metastases, although echocardiography is usually sufficient.
Other tests include complete blood count, acute-phase reactants, routine chemistry tests, cultures,
autoimmune tests, and, when appropriate, tests for HIV, histoplasmosis complement fixation (in
endemic areas), and antibody tests for coxsackievirus, influenza virus, echovirus, and streptococcus.
Anti-DNA and anti-RNA antibody tests may be useful. A tuberculin skin test (usually PPD) or interferon
gamma release assay is done, but thees tests can give false-negative results; TB pericarditis can be ruled
out only by culture of pericardial fluid for acid-fast bacilli.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 14/21
--- Страница 15 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagnosis references
1. Adler Y, Charron P, Imazio M, et al: 2015 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
pericardial diseases: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Pericardial Diseases of
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: The European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J 36(42):2921–2964, 2015. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehv318
2. Antonopoulos AS, Vrettos A, Androulakis E, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging of
pericardial diseases: a comprehensive guide [published correction appears in Eur Heart J
Cardiovasc Imaging 2024 Feb 22;25(3):e104]. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2023;24(8):983-998.
doi:10.1093/ehjci/jead092
3. Welch TD, Ling LH, Espinosa RE, et al: Echocardiographic diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis:
Mayo Clinic criteria. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 7:526, 2014.
4. Mathur AP, Saini A, Lucas BP, AlYousef T, Margeta B, Mba B: Diagnostic accuracy retrospectively
of electrocardiographic findings and cancer history for tamponade in patients determined to have
pericardial effusion by transthoracic echocardiogram. Am J Cardiol 111(7):1062–1066, 2013.
doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.11.064
5. Klein AL, Abbara S, Agler DA, et al: American Society of Echocardiography clinical
recommendations for multimodality cardiovascular imaging of patients with pericardial disease:
endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance and Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 26(9):965–1012.e15, 2013. doi:
10.1016/j.echo.2013.06.023
Treatment of Pericarditis
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine, and, infrequently,
corticosteroids for pain and inflammation.
Pericardiocentesis for tamponade and some large effusions
Sometimes intrapericardial medications (eg, triamcinolone)
Sometimes pericardial resection for constrictive pericarditis, particularly when symptomatic
Treatment of underlying cause (eg, cancer)
Treatment guidelines are available from the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of
Pericardial Diseases of the European Society of Cardiology (1). Hospitalization is warranted for some
patients with an initial episode of acute pericarditis, particularly those with moderate or large effusions
or with high-risk features, such as elevated temperature, subacute onset, immunosuppression, recent
trauma, oral anticoagulant therapy, failure to respond to an initial course of aspirin or NSAIDs, and
myopericarditis. Hospitalization is needed to determine etiology and to observe for the development of
cardiac tamponade. Close, early follow-up is important in patients who are not hospitalized. Possible
causative medications (eg, anticoagulants, procainamide, phenytoin) are stopped. For cardiac
tamponade, immediate pericardiocentesis (see figure Pericardiocentesis) is done; removal of even a
small volume of fluid may be lifesaving.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 15/21
--- Страница 16 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Ultrasound-Guided Pericardioce...
VIDEO
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 16/21
--- Страница 17 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Pericardiocentesis
Except in emergencies (eg, cardiac tamponade), pericardiocentesis, a potentially lethal
procedure, should be done using echocardiographic guidance in a cardiac catheterization
laboratory and should be supervised by a cardiologist or thoracic surgeon if possible.
Resuscitation equipment must be at hand. IV sedation (eg, morphine 0.1 mg/kg or fentanyl 25
to 50 microgram plus midazolam 3 to 5 mg) is desirable. The patient should be recumbent,
with the head elevated 30° from the horizontal.
Under aseptic conditions, the skin and subcutaneous tissues are infiltrated with lidocaine.
A 75-mm short-beveled, 16-gauge needle is attached via a 3-way stopcock to a 30- or 50-mL
syringe. The pericardium may be entered via the right or left xiphocostal angle or from the tip
of the xiphoid process with the needle directed inward, upward, and close to the chest wall.
The needle is advanced with constant suction applied to the syringe.
Echocardiography may be used to guide the needle as agitated saline is injected through it.
Echocardiography is also increasingly used to identify the optimal puncture site and the
needle trajectory.
Once in place, the needle should be clamped next to the skin to prevent it from entering
further than necessary and possibly puncturing the heart or injuring a coronary vessel. ECG
monitoring is essential for detecting arrhythmias produced when the myocardium is touched
or punctured. As a rule, right atrial pressure and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
(pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) are monitored.
Fluid is withdrawn until intrapericardial pressure falls below right atrial pressure, usually to
subatmospheric levels. If continued drainage is needed, a plastic catheter may be passed
through the needle into the pericardium and the needle withdrawn. The catheter may be
removed when drainage is less than 25–50 mL/24 hours (usually 2–4 days).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 17/21
--- Страница 18 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Pain can usually be controlled with colchicine (eg, 0.5 or 0.6 to 1.0 or 1.2 mg), aspirin (325 to 650 mg
orally every 4 to 6 hours), or other NSAIDs (eg, ibuprofen 600 to 800 mg orally every 6 to 8 hours) (1). A
proton pump inhibitor should be considered to improve the gastric tolerability of NSAIDs. The intensity
of therapy is dictated by the patient’s distress. Severe pain may require opioids. Risk of recurrence may
be decreased with NSAID treatment if the duration of treatment is 3 to 4 weeks, but this approach has
not been studied adequately. Colchicine 0.5 or 0.6 mg to 1 or 1.2 mg orally once a day for 3 months as
an adjunct significantly decreases the recurrence rate and symptom persistence in patients with a first
episode of acute pericarditis and is increasingly being used as first-line therapy (2).
Although most mild cases of idiopathic and viral pericarditis respond well within a week, the optimal
duration of treatment is unclear. Typically, patients should be treated at least until any effusion and
evidence of inflammation (eg, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein levels) have
resolved.
Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone 60 to 80 mg orally once a day for 1 week, followed by rapid tapering of
the dose) may be used in patients with specific indications (eg, systemic rheumatic disease,
autoimmune or uremic pericarditis, failure to respond to colchicine or NSAIDs) but are not given
routinely because they enhance viral multiplication and recurrence is common when the dosage is
tapered; colchicine may be particularly useful during the corticosteroid taper. An alternative approach
that may have a lower rate of recurrence is the use of prednisone at a lower dose (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 18/21
--- Страница 19 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
orally once a day) for 2 to 4 weeks followed by a slow taper over approximately 3 months. Tuberculous
and pyogenic pericarditis should be excluded before corticosteroid therapy is initiated. Intrapericardial
2
instillation of triamcinolone 300 mg/m avoids systemic adverse effects and is highly effective but is
typically reserved for patients with recurrent or refractory disease.
Anticoagulants are usually contraindicated in acute pericarditis because they may cause intrapericardial
bleeding and even fatal tamponade; however, they can be given in early pericarditis complicating acute
MI. Uncommonly (eg, with chronic constrictive pericarditis), pericardial resection is required.
Painful recurrences of acute pericarditis may respond to NSAIDs and/or colchicine 0.5 mg orally twice a
day for 6 to 12 months with a gradual taper. If these medications do not suffice, corticosteroids may be
tried, presuming the cause is not infectious. Refractory cases have been treated with interleukin-1
receptor antagonists (eg, anakinra, canakinumab, rilonacept [3]); however, infection should be ruled out
first.
Infections are treated with specific antimicrobials. Complete drainage is often necessary.
In postpericardiotomy syndrome, post-MI syndrome, or idiopathic pericarditis, antibiotics are not
indicated. An NSAID at full doses may control pain and effusion. When required to control pain, fever,
and effusion, prednisone (eg, 20 to 60 mg orally once a day) may be given for 3 to 4 days. If the
response is satisfactory, the dose is gradually reduced, and the medication may be stopped in 7 to 14
days. But sometimes many months of treatment are needed. Beginning on postoperative day 3,
colchicine 1 mg orally once a day for 30 days, after a 2-mg load may reduce the incidence of
postpericardiotomy syndrome after cardiac surgery. Aspirin should be used when pericarditis occurs in
patients with an acute myocardial infarction.
For pericarditis due to rheumatic fever, another systemic rheumatic disease, or tumor, therapy is
directed at the underlying process.
For pericardial effusion due to trauma, surgery is sometimes required to repair the injury and remove
blood from the pericardium.
Pericarditis due to uremia may respond to increased frequency of hemodialysis, aspiration, or systemic
or intrapericardial corticosteroids. Intrapericardial triamcinolone may be useful.
Chronic effusions are best treated by treating the cause, if known. Recurrent or persistent symptomatic
effusions may be treated with balloon pericardiotomy or a surgical pericardial window (4).
Asymptomatic effusions of unknown cause may require only observation.
Congestion in chronic constrictive pericarditis may be alleviated with salt restriction and diuretics.
Digoxin is indicated only if atrial arrhythmias or ventricular systolic dysfunction is present.
Patients with symptomatic constrictive pericarditis (eg, with dyspnea, unexplained weight gain, a new or
increased pleural effusion, or ascites) and those with markers of chronic constriction (eg, cachexia, atrial
fibrillation, hepatic dysfunction, pericardial calcification) usually require pericardial resection. However,
patients with mild symptoms (because they derive little benefit), heavy calcification, or extensive
myocardial damage may be poor surgical candidates.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 19/21
--- Страница 20 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
The mortality rate for pericardial resection may approach 40% in patients with New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional class IV (see table New York Heart Association Classification of Heart
Failure). Patients who have constrictive pericarditis due to irradiation or a systemic rheumatic disease
are especially likely to have severe myocardial damage and may not benefit from pericardial resection.
Patients with newly diagnosed constrictive pericarditis who are hemodynamically stable and without
evidence of chronic constriction may be given a 3-month trial of anti-inflammatory medications, rather
than pericardiectomy. Patients with pericardial inflammation on MRI may also benefit from a trial of
pharmacotherapy first, rather than pericardiectomy.
Measures that minimize the risk of developing constrictive pericarditis include the following (5):
Timely guideline-based treatment of acute and recurrent pericarditis
Complete drainage of infected pericardial effusions
In patients undergoing pericardiotomy, prophylactic colchicine and drainage of
postpericardiotomy pericardial effusions
Treatment references
1. Adler Y, Charron P, Imazio M, et al: 2015 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
pericardial diseases: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Pericardial Diseases of
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: The European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J 36(42):2921–2964, 2015. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehv318
2. Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al: A randomized trial of colchicine for acute pericarditis. N Engl
J Med 369(16):1522–1528, 2013. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1208536
3. Abadie BQ, Cremer PC: Interleukin-1 Antagonists for the Treatment of Recurrent
Pericarditis. BioDrugs 36(4):459–472, 2022. doi:10.1007/s40259-022-00537-7
4. Hoit BD: Pericardial Effusion and Cardiac Tamponade Pathophysiology and New Approaches to
Treatment. Curr Cardiol Rep 25(9):1003–1014, 2023. doi:10.1007/s11886-023-01920-8
5. Lazaros G, Vlachopoulos C, Lazarou E, Tsioufis K: New Approaches to Management of Pericardial
Effusions. Curr Cardiol Rep 23(8):106, 2021. Published 2021 Jul 1. doi:10.1007/s11886-021-01539-7
Key Points
Patients with pericarditis may have symptoms and signs of pericardial inflammation
and/or fluid accumulation (effusion).
Electrocardiography and echocardiography are usually adequate for diagnosis, but right
and left heart catheterization, CT, or MRI may be needed to diagnose constrictive
pericarditis.
Pain is treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and/or colchicine;
corticosteroids may be added for selected patients in whom the cause is noninfectious.
Effusions usually respond to treatment of the cause, but recurrent or persistently
symptomatic effusions may require drainage (percutaneous or surgical).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 20/21
--- Страница 21 ---
22/01/2026, 14:48 Pericarditis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptomatic chronic constrictive pericarditis usually requires pericardial resection,
although patients with early stage constrictive pericarditis can be treated with a trial of
pharmacotherapy first.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/myocarditis-and-pericarditis/pericarditis 21/21
