=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Pericarditis overview - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:25.127028",
  "file_size_bytes": 415666,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Pericarditis overview - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Pericarditis overview
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com)
Associate Editor(s)-in-Chief: Homa Najafi, M.D.[2] (mailto:hnajafi@bidmc.harvard.edu)
Overview
Pericarditis is a condition in which the sac-like covering surrounding the heart (the pericardium)
becomes inflamed. Symptoms of pericarditis include chest pain which increases with deep
breathing and lying flat.
Historical Perspective
The pericardium is a double-walled sac that contains the heart and the roots of the great vessels.
Morphologically, it is a conical-shaped, double-walled fibro-serous membrane. It rests posteriorly
to the sternum at the level of second to sixth costal cartilages and T5-T8 vertebrae.
Classification
Pericarditis may be classified according to duration of the disease and recurrence into acute,
Incessant, recurrent and chronic. Moreover, pericarditis can be classified based on the etiology in
two groups of infectious and non-infectious causes.
Pathophysiology
Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardium, which is the double-walled sac that contains the
heart and the roots of the great vessels. There can be an accompanying accumulation of fluid that
can be either serous (free flowing fluid) or fibrinous (an exudate, which is a thick fluid composed of
proteins, fibrin strands, inflammatory cells, cell breakdown products, and sometimes bacteria).
Vascular congestion of the pericardium is also present. The underlying myocardium may or may
not be inflamed as well. If the myocardium is involved in the inflammatory process, it is called
myopericarditis, and CK and troponin levels may be elevated. Cardiotropic viruses usually spread
to the myocardium and pericardium hematogenously and cause acute inflammation with
infiltration of polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytes and pericardial vascularization. Most patients
with viral pericarditis recover completely with few developing recurrences. Some patients develop
constrictive pericarditis which could be disabling. Bacterial pericarditis results from contiguous
spread of infection within the chest, either de novo or after surgery or trauma, spread from
infective endocarditis, hematogenous, or direct inoculation as a result of penetrating injury or
cardiothoracic surgery.
Causes
The causes of pericarditis can be divided into infectious and non-infectious ones. Infectious causes
include bacterial, viral, fungal and, parasitic. While, non-infectious causes include autoimmune,
neoplastic, metabolic, traumatic and iatrogenic, and drug-related. Acute myocardial infarction,
Addisonian crisis, aortic dissection and rupture, blunt or penetrating chest trauma, esophageal
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
 1/6

perforation, gastric perforation, and myocardial rupture are life threatening causes of pericarditis.
Common causes of pericarditis include viral, bacterial organisms, neoplasms, autoimmune and
renal failure.
Differentiating Pericarditis from other Diseases
Pericarditis must be differentiated from diseases presenting with chest pain, shortness of breath
and tachypnea which include myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, congestive heart failure,
pneumonia, vasculitis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Manifestation of the
pericarditis can help in differentiation from myocardial infarction. Moreover, other differential
diagnosis include aortic stenosis, coronary artery vasospasm, esophageal rupture, esophageal
spasm, esophagitis,acute gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and peptic ulcer disease should
be considered.
Epidemiology and Demographics
The incidence of acute pericarditis is approximately 27.7 per 100,000 individuals annually. The
recurrence of disease is seen in almost 30% of patients after first episode. The mortality rate of
acute pericarditis is approximately 1.1% in developed countries. Patients of all age groups may
develop acute pericarditis. Although it commonly affects men in 20 to 50 years of age. Pericarditis
in developed countries is most commonly due to malignancy or viral infection. It usually follows
respiratory infections, most commonly echovirus or coxsackie virus. In children, it is most
commonly caused by adenovirus or coxsackie virus. In developing countries pericarditis is usually
secondary to tuberculosis or HIV infection. Tuberculous pericarditis, caused by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, is found in approximately 1% of all autopsied cases of TB and in 1% to 2% of instances
of pulmonary TB.
Risk Factors
Screening
There is insufficient evidence to recommend routine screening for pericarditis.
Natural History, Complications and Prognosis
Pericarditis is often self-limited and most people recover in 2 weeks to 3 months. However, the
condition can be complicated by significant fluid buildup around the heart (a pericardial effusion
or cardiac tamponade) and may require urgent intervention including pericardiocentesis. If
scarring of the sac around the heart (the pericardium) occurs, then this is called constrictive
pericarditis which may require surgical stripping of the scar.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic Study of Choice
History and Symptoms
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 2/6

Patients with pericarditis commonly present with chest pain that changes with position, cough,
fever, breathlessness, and fatigue are the other common symptoms. Less common symptoms
include palpitations, hiccup, odynophagia, faint, dizziness, and abdominal pain which is seen
mostly in children.
Physical Examination
A careful physical examination must be performed to exclude the presence of cardiac tamponade, a
dangerous complication of pericarditis. If cardiac tamponade is present, then pulsus paradoxus,
hypotension, an elevated jugular venous pressure and peripheral edema may be present.
Laboratory Findings
Non-specific markers of inflammation are generally elevated in pericarditis. These include the
leukocyte count, C-reactive protein, and ESR. The cardiac troponin is elevated if there is an injury
to the underlying myocardium, a condition termed as myopericarditis. Diagnostic
pericardiocentesis and biopsy help in identifying an underlying infectious or malignant
process.Non-specific markers of inflammation are generally elevated in pericarditis. These include
the leukocyte count, C-reactive protein, and ESR. The cardiac troponin is elevated if there is an
injury to the underlying myocardium, a condition termed as myopericarditis. Diagnostic
pericardiocentesis and biopsy help in identifying an underlying infectious or malignant process.
Electrocardiogram
In the presence of a large effusion or tamponade, there may be diminished voltage and electrical
alternans (alternation of QRS complex amplitude or axis between beats).
X-ray
A flask-shaped, enlarged cardiac silhouette will be observed on chest x-ray in pericarditis
complicated with pericardial effusion or tamponade. A mass may also be seen when malignancy is
the cause. Calcification of pericardium may be noted in constrictive pericarditis.
Echocardiography and Ultrasound
Echocardiography is generally performed to assess for the presence of a pericardial effusion and to
assess and monitor its size. Echocardiography is critical in confirming the clinical suspicion cardiac
tamponade.
CT scan
On CT, pericardial fluid adds to the thickness of pericardium as both have the similar signal
intensities. In pericarditis, pericardium can generate an intermediate signal intensity and may
enhance after gadolinium administration. In pericardial effusion, hemorrhagic effusions can be
differentiated from a transudate or an exudate based on signal characteristics (high signal on T1-
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 3/6

weighted images) or density (high-density clot on CT). CT is superior to MRI in the visualization of
pericardial calcification which is often seen in the patient with pericardial constriction. CT imaging
also helps in detecting the presence of tumors and the extent of metastasis of the neoplasm.
MRI
On MRI, normal pericardium appears as a thin dark band that is bordered by a bright band on
both sides on T1 weighted spin imaging. These surrounding bright bands are associated with the
surrounding epicardial and pericardial fat. Following the administration of gadolinium,
pericardium may appear thick and inflamed in the setting of pericarditis. Lower intensity signal is
observed in constrictive pericarditis than in acute pericarditis. Comprehensive visualization of the
LV endocardium and the physiologic consequences of abnormal pericardial thickening can also be
obtained without exposure to ionizing radiation.
Other Imaging Findings
Other diagnostic studies
Echocardiography guided pericardiocentesis may be helpful in the diagnosis of the pericarditis
etiology. Pericardial fluid aspiration for cytology and immunohistochemistry analysis should be
done in pericarditis with effusion. Pericardiocentesis should be done in patients with high
susceptibility of neoplastic pericarditis which cytology analysis for malignancy was negative.
Treatment
Medical Therapy
The management of pericarditis depends on whether the patient has an uncomplicated vs.
complicated disease course. Uncomplicated pericarditis is generally treated with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, such as Ibuprofen in cases of either viral or idiopathic pericarditis, and
Aspirin in cases of post-MI pericarditis. Pericarditis complicated with either effusion or cardiac
tamponade is generally treated with urgent pericardiocentesis in the case of cardiac tamponade,
antibiotics in the case of purulent pericardial effusion, and either steroids or colchicine among
patients with recurrent or refractory disease.
Interventions
Surgery
Pericardiocentesis
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 4/6

Percutaneous pericardiocentesis is a procedure where fluid is aspirated from the pericardium (the
sac enveloping the heart) using a needle via a percutaneous approach. Pericardiocentesis can
provide a diagnostic sampling of pericardial fluid and can be used as a therapeutic maneuver to
evacuate pericardial fluid and lower the pericardial pressure.
Pericardial Window
Creation of a pericardial window is a cardiac surgical procedure in which an opening is made in the
pericardium to drain fluid that has accumulated around the heart by creating a fistula or "window"
from the pericardial space to the peritoneal cavity. Flow of fluid into the peritoneal cavity prevents
the accumulation of fluid around the heart (a pericardial effusion), which might cause compression
and impaired filling of the heart (cardiac tamponade), a dangerous complication. The procedure is
performed for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. The creation of a pericardial window is
usually performed by a cardiac surgeon or thoracic surgeon who makes an incision, commonly
sub-xiphoid, and cuts a small hole in the pericardium. This surgery is performed with local
anesthesia. An incision is made either below the sternum, or alternately between the ribs of the left
chest. The resection can be with scissors, cautery, a stapling device, or a harmonic scalpel, with no
one technique demonstrably better than another. It is best to have a combination of techniques
available to resect the pericardium adequately. The surgeon may place a catheter in the pericardial
window so that fluid can continue to drain for a short period of time after the surgery. Chest tubes
are removed in 2-3 days once the drainage is less than 200cc/24hrs.
Pericardial Stripping
Pericardiectomy is the surgical removal of part or most of the pericardium. This operation is
performed to relieve constrictive pericarditis or to remove a pericardium that is calcified and
fibrous. Constrictive pericarditis is a progressive disease without spontaneous reversal of
pericardial thickening. Some patients can be medically managed for several years. Edema can be
controlled with diuretics and slowing the heart rate can maximize the diastolic filling time. Many
patients eventually develop significant debility from impaired cardiac output and elevated right
and left sided filling pressures. The definitive treatment for constrictive pericarditis is
pericardiectomy which is also known as pericardial stripping. This is a surgical procedure where
the entire pericardium is peeled away from the heart. Due to the significant risks involved with
pericardial stripping, many patients are treated medically, with judicious use of diuretics.
Primary Prevention
Secondary Prevention
References
Template:WH Template:WS
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaCcoeouktiiceasl hore ldpe vuisc ed ienlidvuesrt royu sru speprovritc feosr. tBhyis u ssiitne ga nodu rw see nreveicde yso, uyro vui eawgreer es utop poourrt euds De oonf actoioonksie |s E.ditorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
 5/6

Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 6/6
