=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:42.258185",
  "file_size_bytes": 331262,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Pulmonary Stenosis
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) is narrowing of the pulmonary outflow tract, or
restricted opening of the pulmonary valve leaflets, causing obstruction of blood
flow from the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery during systole. Most mild
cases are congenital; many remain asymptomatic until adulthood. Signs include
a crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur. Diagnosis is by echocardiography.
Symptomatic patients and those with large gradients require balloon
valvuloplasty.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Etiology of Pulmonary Stenosis
Pulmonary stenosis is most often congenital and affects predominantly children; stenosis may be
valvular or just below the valve in the outflow tract (infundibular); commonly it is a component of
tetralogy of Fallot. Supravalvular stenosis may also occur, sometimes in combination with valvar
stenosis, as a tethered valve/supravalve complex, or as isolated supravalvar narrowing (as in Williams or
Alagille syndromes).
Less common causes are:
Noonan syndrome (a genetic syndrome involving the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway)
Carcinoid syndrome (in adults)
Symptoms and Signs of Pulmonary Stenosis
Many children with pulmonary stenosis remain asymptomatic for years and do not develop overt
symptoms until adulthood, although abnormalities can sometimes be detected on exercise testing
before symptoms appear. Even in adulthood, many patients remain asymptomatic. When symptoms of
 1/5

 Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
pulmonary stenosis develop, they resemble those of aortic stenosis (exercise intolerance, syncope,
angina, dyspnea).
Visible and palpable signs reflect the effects of right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy and include a
prominent jugular venous a wave (due to forceful atrial contraction against a hypertrophied RV), an RV
precordial lift or heave, and a left parasternal systolic thrill at the second intercostal space.
Auscultation
Widened second heart sound (S2) and delayed pulmonic component of S2 (P2)
Harsh crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur
On auscultation, the first heart sound (S1) is normal and the splitting S2 is widened (but not fixed)
because prolonged pulmonary ejection causes a delay in P2. As severity of PS worsens, P2 becomes
softer in volume. A click in congenital PS is thought to result from abnormal ventricular wall tension.
The click occurs early in systole (very near S1) and may be louder in inspiration. A harsh crescendo-
decrescendo ejection murmur is audible and is heard best at the left parasternal second (valvular
stenosis) or fourth (infundibular stenosis) intercostal space with the diaphragm of the stethoscope
when the patient leans forward. In RV failure and hypertrophy, the third and fourth heart sounds (S3
and S4) are rarely audible at the left parasternal fourth intercostal space.
Unlike the aortic stenosis murmur, a pulmonary stenosis murmur does not radiate, and the crescendo
component lengthens as stenosis progresses. The murmur grows louder immediately with Valsalva
release and with inspiration; the patient may need to be standing for this effect to be heard.
AUDIO
Pulmonary Stenosis Murmur
Diagnosis of Pulmonary Stenosis
Echocardiography
Diagnosis of pulmonary stenosis is confirmed by Doppler echocardiography, which can characterize the
severity as (1):
Mild: Peak gradient < 36 mm Hg or peak velocity < 3 m/second
Moderate: Peak gradient 36 to 64 mm Hg or peak velocity 3 to 4 m/second
Severe: Peak gradient > 64 mm Hg or peak velocity > 4 m/second
ECG may be normal or show RV hypertrophy or right bundle branch block.
Right heart catheterization is indicated when 2 levels of obstruction are suspected (valvular and
infundibular), when direct measurement of right ventricular or other pressures is needed, when clinical
and echocardiographic findings differ, or before intervention is performed.
 2/5

 Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cardiac MRI may be useful if there is a need for quantification of right ventricle size or function, or the
degree of concomitant pulmonary insufficiency.
Phonocardiographic Characteristics of Heart Murmurs
Diagnosis reference
1. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Adults
With Congenital Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circulation
2019 Apr 2;139(14):e833-e834. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000683]. Circulation
2019;139(14):e698-e800. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603
 3/5

 Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment of Pulmonary Stenosis
Balloon valvuloplasty
Sometimes surgical valvuloplasty or valve replacement
Prognosis of pulmonary stenosis without treatment is generally good and improves with appropriate
intervention. Mild pulmonary valve stenosis in children may improve and even resolve spontaneously.
The first-line treatment of pulmonary stenosis is balloon valvuloplasty, which is indicated for patients
with symptoms and moderate or severe valvular stenosis and for asymptomatic patients with severe
stenosis.
Surgical valvuloplasty may be performed when there is another indication for cardiac surgery if the
patient is otherwise not a candidate for a transcatheter approach. Pulmonary valve replacement may be
necessary if there is significant pulmonary regurgitation (PR), pulmonary valve dysplasia, and/or
hypoplasia of the pulmonary valve annulus (1). A valved or unvalved right ventricle to pulmonary artery
conduit is used when the anatomy precludes use of the native valve.
When surgical valve replacement is necessary, bioprosthetic valves are preferred due to the high rates
of thrombosis of right-sided mechanical heart valves; anticoagulation is temporarily required (see
Anticoagulation for patients with a prosthetic cardiac valve or native valve disease).
Percutaneous (transcatheter) pulmonary valve replacement is offered at many congenital heart centers
to reduce the number of open heart procedures, especially for those who have had or are expected to
have multiple pulmonary valve interventions. The ability to use this technique depends upon patient
size and the suitability of the pulmonary valve annulus or "landing zone."
Treatment reference
1. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Adults
With Congenital Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circulation
2019 Apr 2;139(14):e833-e834. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000683]. Circulation
2019;139(14):e698-e800. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603
Key Points
Pulmonary stenosis is usually congenital, but symptoms (eg, syncope, angina, dyspnea)
usually do not appear until adulthood.
Heart sounds include wide but not fixed splitting of the second heart sound and a harsh
crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur heard best at the left parasternal second or
fourth intercostal space when the patient leans forward; the murmur grows louder
immediately with Valsalva release and with inspiration.
 4/5

 Pulmonary Stenosis - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Balloon valvuloplasty is performed for symptomatic patients and for asymptomatic
patients with severe pulmonary stenosis.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 5/5
