=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:08.743548",
  "file_size_bytes": 177005,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:52 Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Pulmonary Regurgitation
(Pulmonic Valve Regurgitation)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Pulmonary (pulmonic) regurgitation (PR) is incomplete closure of the pulmonary
valve causing backflow of blood from the pulmonary artery into the right
ventricle during diastole. The most common cause is pulmonary hypertension.
PR is usually asymptomatic. Signs include a decrescendo diastolic murmur.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography. Usually, no specific treatment is necessary
except for management of pulmonary hypertension.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
In adults, the most common cause by far of pulmonary regurgitation, also called pulmonic
regurgitation or pulmonary insufficiency, is:
Secondary pulmonary hypertension
Less common causes are:
Congenital heart disease
Idiopathic pulmonary artery dilation
Infective endocarditis
Surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot or other congenital heart disease involving the
pulmonary valve
Rare causes are:
Carcinoid syndrome
Rheumatic fever
Following intervention for valvular pulmonary stenosis (early or late)
Congenital heart disease such as absent pulmonary valve syndrome and severe Ebstein
anomaly
Severe pulmonary regurgitation is rare and most often results from an isolated congenital defect
involving dilation of the pulmonary artery and pulmonary valve annulus.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/pulmonary-regurgitation 1/4
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:52 Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
PR may contribute to development of right ventricular (RV) dilatation and eventually RV dysfunction–
induced heart failure (HF), but in most cases, pulmonary hypertension contributes to this complication
much more significantly. Rarely, acute RV dysfunction–induced HF develops when endocarditis causes
acute PR.
Symptoms and Signs of Pulmonary Regurgitation
Pulmonary regurgitation is usually asymptomatic. A few patients develop symptoms and signs of RV
dysfunction–induced HF (eg, dyspnea, exercise intolerance, peripheral edema, hepatic congestion).
Palpable signs are attributable to pulmonary hypertension and RV hypertrophy. They include a palpable
pulmonic component (P2) of the second heart sound (S2) at the left upper sternal border and a
sustained RV impulse that is increased in amplitude at the left middle and lower sternal border.
Auscultation
High-pitched, early diastolic decrescendo murmur
On auscultation, the first heart sound (S1) is normal. The S2 may be split or single. When split, P2 may
be loud and audible shortly after the aortic component of S2 (A2) because of pulmonary hypertension,
or P2 may be delayed because of increased RV stroke volume. S2 may be single because of prompt
pulmonary valve closing with a merged A2-P2 or, rarely, because of congenital absence of the
pulmonary valve. An RV third heart sound (S3), fourth heart sound (S4), or both may be audible with RV
dysfunction–induced HF or RV hypertrophy; these sounds can be distinguished from left ventricular
heart sounds because they are located at the left parasternal fourth intercostal space and because they
grow louder with inspiration.
The murmur of PR due to pulmonary hypertension is a high-pitched, early diastolic decrescendo
murmur that begins with P2 and ends before S1 and that radiates toward the mid-right sternal edge
(Graham Steell murmur); it is heard best at the left upper sternal border with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope while the patient holds the breath at end-expiration and sits upright.
The murmur of PR without pulmonary hypertension is shorter, lower-pitched (rougher in quality), and
begins after P2. Both murmurs may resemble the murmur of aortic regurgitation but can be
distinguished by inspiration (which makes the PR murmur louder) and by Valsalva release. After Valsalva
release, the PR murmur immediately becomes loud (because of immediate venous return to the right
side of the heart), but the aortic regurgitation murmur requires 4 or 5 beats to do so. Also, a soft PR
murmur may sometimes become even softer during inspiration because this murmur is usually best
heard at the second left intercostal space, where inspiration pushes the stethoscope away from the
heart. In some forms of congenital heart disease, the murmur of severe PR is quite short because the
pressure gradient between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle equalizes rapidly in diastole.
Mixed pulmonary stenosis and insufficiency, as in the case of a deteriorating bioprosthetic valve or a
right ventricle to pulmonary artery conduit, can be heard as a to-fro murmur in both systole and
diastole.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/pulmonary-regurgitation 2/4
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:52 Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagnosis of Pulmonary Regurgitation
Echocardiography
Pulmonary regurgitation is usually incidentally detected during a physical examination or Doppler
echocardiography performed for other reasons. Mild PR is a common echocardiographic finding that
requires no intervention.
Establishing the severity of pulmonary regurgitation by echocardiography can be challenging; criteria
exist but are most useful when regurgitation is clearly severe (with diastolic flow reversal in the branch
pulmonary arteries, a pressure half-time of 100 msec or less, and a wide color Doppler jet), or clearly
mild (small color jet with minimal or no flow reversal in the main pulmonary artery). Cardiac MRI can be
used to quantify the regurgitant fraction and more precisely grade the severity, along with quantifying
the presence and degree of right ventricle dilation (1, 2).
An ECG and chest radiograph are usually also obtained. ECG may show signs of RV hypertrophy; chest
radiograph may show RV enlargement and evidence of conditions underlying pulmonary hypertension.
Diagnosis references
1. Zoghbi WA, Asch FM, Bruce C, et al. Guidelines for the Evaluation of Valvular Regurgitation After
Percutaneous Valve Repair or Replacement: A Report from the American Society of
Echocardiography Developed in Collaboration with the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, Japanese Society of Echocardiography, and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic
Resonance [published correction appears in J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2019 Jul;32(7):914-917. doi:
10.1016/j.echo.2019.05.013.]. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2019;32(4):431-475.
doi:10.1016/j.echo.2019.01.003
2. Zoghbi WA, Enriquez-Sarano M, Foster E, et al. Recommendations for evaluation of the severity
of native valvular regurgitation with two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr 2003;16(7):777-802. doi:10.1016/S0894-7317(03)00335-3
Treatment of Pulmonary Regurgitation
Treatment of cause
Sometimes pulmonary valve replacement (PVR)
Treatment is management of the condition causing pulmonary regurgitation, particularly when
pulmonary hypertension is the cause.
Pulmonary valve replacement is an option if RV dilation or dysfunction develops, particularly if the
patient has symptoms. Pulmonary valve replacement is the treatment of choice for patients with
moderate or greater PR after intervention for pulmonary stenosis, who have right ventricle dilation and
symptoms or progressive decrease in exercise capacity. Finally, pulmonary valve replacement is
commonly performed in patients after initial tetralogy of Fallot repair, particularly when a transannular
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/pulmonary-regurgitation 3/4
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:52 Pulmonary Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
patch is used (1). Surgical and transcatheter techniques are available for pulmonary valve replacement,
depending upon patient characteristics and specific anatomic considerations.
Treatment reference
1. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of Adults
With Congenital Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circulation
2019 Apr 2;139(14):e833-e834. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000683]. Circulation
2019;139(14):e698-e800. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603
Key Points
In adults, pulmonary regurgitation (PR) is usually caused by pulmonary hypertension.
Hemodynamic consequences are usually due to the cause rather than PR itself.
Heart sounds when PR is due to pulmonary hypertension include a high-pitched, early
diastolic decrescendo murmur that begins with P2 and ends before S1 and that radiates
toward the mid-right sternal edge; it is heard best at the left upper sternal border while
the patient holds the breath at end-expiration and sits upright. The murmur of PR
without pulmonary hypertension is shorter, lower-pitched, and begins after P2.
Treatment is directed at the cause; valve replacement is usually not needed except in
patients with congenital heart disease and prior pulmonary valve intervention.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/valvular-disorders/pulmonary-regurgitation 4/4
