=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:59.007404",
  "file_size_bytes": 570121,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart
By Thomas Cascino, MD, MSc, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023
Radionuclide imaging uses a special detector (gamma camera) to create an image following injection of
radioactive material. This test is done to evaluate
Cardiac valvular disorders
Cardiomyopathy
Congenital cardiac disorders
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Other cardiac disorders
Radionuclide imaging can expose patients to similar amounts of radiation than do comparable
computed tomography (CT) studies. However, because the radioactive material is retained in the patient
briefly, sophisticated radiation alarms (eg, in airports) may be triggered by the patient for several days
after such testing
Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)
 1/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
SPECT in Recent-Onset Angina
IMAGE
IMAGE PROVIDED BY JAMES R. CORBETT, MD.
Planar techniques, which produce a 2-dimensional image, are rarely used; SPECT, which uses a rotating
camera system and tomographic reconstruction to produce a 3-dimensional image, is more common in
the United States. With multihead SPECT systems, imaging can often be completed in ≤ 10 minutes.
Visual comparison of stress and delayed images can be supplemented by quantitative displays. With
SPECT, the following can be identified:
Inferior and posterior abnormalities
Small areas of infarction
Vessels responsible for infarction
The mass of infarcted and viable myocardium can be quantified, helping determine prognosis.
Myocardial Perfusion Imaging
In myocardial perfusion imaging, IV radionuclides are taken up by cardiac tissues in rough proportion to
perfusion; thus, areas of decreased uptake represent areas of relative or absolute ischemia.
Attenuation of myocardial activity by overlying soft tissue may cause false-positive results. Attenuation
by breast tissue in women is especially common. Attenuation by the diaphragm and abdominal
contents may produce spurious inferior wall defects in both sexes but is more common among men.
99m
Attenuation is more likely with technetium-99m ( Tc) than with radioactive thallium 201 (Tl-201).
Indications
Myocardial perfusion imaging is used with stress testing to
Evaluate patients with chest pain of uncertain origin
 2/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Determine the functional significance of coronary artery stenosis seen on angiography
Determine the functional significance of collateral vessels seen on angiography
Evaluate the success of reperfusion interventions (eg, coronary artery bypass grafting
[CABG], percutaneous intervention, thrombolysis)
Estimate prognosis after myocardial infarction
Nuclear Medicine Stress Test
IMAGE
LIVING ART ENTERPRISES/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
After acute myocardial infarction, myocardial perfusion imaging can help estimate prognosis because it
can show extent of the perfusion abnormality due to acute myocardial infarction, extent of scarring due
to previous infarcts, and residual peri-infarct or other areas of reversible ischemia.
Protocols and imaging agents
Various protocols are used depending on the imaging agent, which include
Radioactive thallium-201 (Tl-201)
Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) markers (sestamibi, tetrofosmin, and teboroxime)
Iodine-123 (I-123)–labeled fatty acids
I-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)
Radioactive thallium-201 (Tl-201), which acts as a potassium analog, was the original tracer used in
stress testing. It is injected at peak stress and imaged with SPECT, followed 4 hours later by injection of
half the original dose during rest and by repeat SPECT. The goal of this protocol is to evaluate reversible
perfusion defects that may warrant intervention. After stress testing, the perfusion imbalance between
normal coronary arteries and those distal to a stenosis appears as a relative decrease in Tl-201 uptake
in the areas perfused by the stenosed arteries. Sensitivity of stress testing with Tl-201 for coronary
artery disease is similar whether imaging is done after exercise stress or pharmacologic stress. The use
 3/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
of Tl-201 has declined recently in favor of agents with improved image quality and lower radiation
doses.
Several technetium-99m (Tc-99m) myocardial perfusion markers have been developed because the
imaging characteristics of Tl-201 are not ideal for the gamma camera. Markers include sestamibi
(commonly used), tetrofosmin, and teboroxime (see table Technetium-99m Myocardial Perfusion
Markers). Protocols include 2-day stress-rest, 1-day rest-stress, and 1-day stress-rest. Some protocols
use dual isotopes (Tl-201 and Tc-99m), although this approach is expensive. With either of these
markers, sensitivity is about 90%, and specificity is about 71% to detect coronary artery disease.
For 2-day protocols, imaging at rest may be omitted if the initial stress test shows no evidence of
abnormal perfusion. When higher doses of Tc-99m (> 30 millicurie) are used, first-transit function
studies (with ventriculography) may be used with perfusion imaging.
Other radionuclides include iodine-123 (I-123)–labeled fatty acids, which produces cold spots where
myocardium is ischemic; gallium citrate-67 (Ga-67), which accumulates in sites of active inflammation
(eg, in acute inflammatory cardiomyopathy); and I-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine, a neurotransmitter
analog taken up and stored in neurons of the sympathetic nervous system and used in research to
evaluate heart failure, diabetes, pheochromocytoma, certain arrhythmias, and arrhythmogenic right
ventricular dysplasia.
TABLE
Technetium-99m (Tc-99) Myocardial Perfusion Markers
Marker Characteristics
Tc-99m sestamibi Myocardial uptake is slower than that
with thallium, but there is little
myocardial washout, allowing timing
flexibility; patients with acute symptoms
can be injected with sestamibi
immediately and imaged several hours
later.
Uptake depends more on blood flow
than on viable myocardium; viable
regions with low blood flow may be
misclassified as scar.
Studies may be done on a single or on
separate days, with a low initial dose
during stress followed by a much higher
dose at rest.
With electrocardiography (ECG)-gated
imaging, ventricular wall motion, wall
 4/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Marker Characteristics
thickening, and ejection fraction can be
estimated.
Characteristics are similar to those of
Tc-99m tetrofosmin
sestamibi.
First-pass extraction from the
myocardium is high, with rapid washout;
half of peak myocardial activity is gone
by 10 minutes.
Because of its rapid dynamics, use with
treadmill exercise is difficult.
Tc-99m teboroxime
Studies suggest that stress-redistribution
testing may be completed within 15
minutes of pharmacologic stress.
Coronary artery disease may be
detectable by analyzing myocardial
washout of the tracer after injection at
rest without the need for stress.
Infarct Avid Imaging
Infarct avid imaging uses radiolabeled markers that accumulate in areas of damaged myocardium, such
as Tc-99m pyrophosphate and antimyosin (indium-111 [In-111]–labeled antibodies to cardiac myosin).
Images usually become positive 12 to 24 hours after acute myocardial infarction and remain positive for
about 1 week; they may remain positive if myocardial necrosis continues post-myocardial infarction or if
aneurysms develop. This technique is rarely used now because other diagnostic tests for myocardial
infarction (eg, biomarkers) are more readily available and less expensive and because it provides no
prognostic information other than infarct size.
Tc-99m pyrophosphate is now being used similarly to evaluate cardiac involvement in transthyretin
amyloidosis (a type of amyloidosis in which sheets of misfolded transthyretin protein can accumulate in
tissues, including the heart). Transthyretin amyloid deposits in the myocardium are particularly avid for
Tc-99m pyrophosphate. Absent serum and urine manifestations of a light chain amyloidosis (which also
can infiltrate the myocardium and result in a positive scan) or a recent infarct, a high ratio of uptake in
the myocardium is specific for transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis and can eliminate the need for
myocardial biopsy.
Radionuclide Ventriculography
 5/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Radionuclide ventriculography is used to evaluate ventricular function. It is useful for measuring resting
and exercise ejection fraction in coronary artery disease, valvular heart disease, and congenital heart
disease. Some clinicians prefer it for serial assessment of ventricular function in patients taking
cardiotoxic cancer chemotherapy (eg, anthracyclines). However, radionuclide ventriculography has been
largely replaced by echocardiography, which is less expensive, does not require radiation exposure, and
theoretically can measure ejection fractions as accurately.
Tc-99m–labeled red blood cells are injected intravenously. Left ventricular (LV) and right ventricular (RV)
function can be evaluated by
First-transit studies (a type of beat-to-beat evaluation)
Gated (electrocardiography [ECG]-synchronized) blood pool imaging done over several
minutes (multiple-gated acquisition [MUGA])
Either study can be done during rest or after exercise. First-transit studies are rapid and relatively easy,
but MUGA provides better images and is more widely used.
In first-transit studies, 8 to 10 cardiac cycles are imaged as the marker mixes with blood and passes
through the central circulation. First-transit studies are ideal for assessing RV function and intracardiac
shunts.
In MUGA, imaging is synchronized with the R wave of the ECG. Multiple images are taken of short,
sequential portions of each cardiac cycle for 5 to 10 minutes. Computer analysis generates an average
blood pool configuration for each portion of the cardiac cycle and synthesizes the configurations into a
continuous cinematic loop resembling a beating heart.
MUGA can quantitate numerous indexes of ventricular function, including regional wall motion, ejection
fraction (EF); ratio of stroke volume to end-diastolic volume, ejection and filling rates, LV volume, and
indexes of relative volume overload (eg, LV:RV stroke volume ratios). EF is used most commonly.
MUGA during rest has virtually no risk. It is used for serially evaluating RV and LV function in various
disorders (eg, valvular heart disorders); for monitoring patients taking potentially cardiotoxic drugs (eg,
doxorubicin); and for assessing the effects of angioplasty, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG),
thrombolysis, and other procedures in patients with CAD or myocardial infarction. Arrhythmias are a
relative contraindication because there may be few normal cardiac cycles.
Left ventriculography
MUGA is useful for detecting left ventricular aneurysms; sensitivity and specificity are > 90% for typical
anterior or anteroapical true aneurysms. Conventional gated blood pool imaging shows inferoposterior
LV aneurysms less well than it shows anterior and lateral aneurysms; additional views are required.
Gated SPECT imaging takes longer (about 20 to 25 minutes with a multihead camera) than a single
planar gated view (5 to 10 minutes) but shows all portions of the ventricles.
Right ventriculography
 6/7

 Radionuclide Imaging of the Heart - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MUGA is used to assess right ventricular function in patients who have a lung disorder or an inferior left
ventricular infarct that may involve the RV. Normally, right ventricular ejection fraction (40 to 55% with
most techniques) is lower than left ventricular ejection fraction. RVEF is low in many patients with
pulmonary hypertension and in patients with RV infarction or cardiomyopathy affecting the RV.
Idiopathic cardiomyopathy is usually characterized by biventricular dysfunction, unlike typical coronary
artery disease, which usually causes more left ventricular than right ventricular dysfunction.
Valve assessment
MUGA can be used with rest-stress protocols to assess valvular disorders that result in left ventricular
volume overload. In aortic regurgitation, a reduction in resting EF or no increase in EF with exercise is a
sign of deteriorating cardiac function and may indicate a need for valvular repair. MUGA also can be
used to calculate the regurgitant fraction in regurgitation of any valve. Normally, the stroke volume of
the 2 ventricles is equal. However, in patients with left-sided valvular regurgitation, LV stroke volume
exceeds that of the right ventricle by an amount proportional to the regurgitant fraction. Thus, if the RV
is normal, the regurgitant fraction of the LV can be calculated from the LV:RV stroke volume ratio.
Shunt assessment
With MUGA and commercially available computer programs, size of a congenital shunt can be
quantified by the stroke volume ratio or, during the first transit of the marker, by the ratio of abnormal
early pulmonary recirculation of radioactivity to total pulmonary radioactivity.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 7/7
