=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:41.955283",
  "file_size_bytes": 534179,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Renovascular Hypertension
By Matthew R. Weir, MD, University of Maryland School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 | Modified Dec 2025
Renovascular hypertension is blood pressure elevation due to partial or
complete occlusion of one or more renal arteries or their branches. It is usually
asymptomatic unless long-standing. A bruit can be heard over one or both renal
arteries in < 50% of patients. Diagnosis is by physical examination and renal
imaging with duplex ultrasound, CT angiography, or magnetic resonance
angiography. Treatment is with medications and sometimes revascularization
by percutaneous angioplasty or surgery.
(See also Hypertension.)
Renovascular disease is one of the most common causes of reversible hypertension but accounts for <
1% of all cases of hypertension (1). Stenosis or occlusion of a main renal artery, an accessory renal
artery, or any of their branches can cause hypertension by stimulating release of renin from
juxtaglomerular cells of the affected kidney. The area of the arterial lumen must be decreased by ≥ 70%
and a significant poststenotic gradient must be present before stenosis is likely to contribute to blood
pressure (BP) elevation.
Overall, about 80% of cases are caused by renal atherosclerosis and 20% by fibromuscular dysplasia.
Atherosclerosis is more common among men > 50 years and affects mainly the proximal one-third of
the renal artery. Fibromuscular dysplasia is more common among younger patients (usually women)
and usually affects the distal two-thirds of the main renal artery and the branches of the renal arteries.
Rarer causes include emboli, trauma, inadvertent ligation during surgery, and extrinsic compression of
the renal pedicle by tumors.
Renovascular hypertension is characterized by high cardiac output and high peripheral resistance.
General reference
1. Dworkin LD, Cooper CJ. Clinical practice. Renal-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(20):1972-
1978. doi:10.1056/NEJMcp0809200
 1/6

 Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms and Signs of Renovascular Hypertension
Renovascular hypertension is usually asymptomatic. A systolic-diastolic bruit in the epigastrium, usually
transmitted to one or both upper quadrants and sometimes to the back, is almost pathognomonic, but
it is present in only about 50% of patients with fibromuscular dysplasia and is rare in patients with renal
atherosclerosis.
Renovascular hypertension should be suspected if:
Diastolic hypertension develops abruptly
New or previously stable hypertension rapidly worsens over a period of 6 months
Hypertension is initially severe (eg, systolic BP > 180 mm Hg)
There is unexplained worsening renal function
Hypertension is resistant to medications
A history of trauma to the back or flank or acute pain in this region with or without hematuria suggests
renovascular hypertension (possibly due to arterial injury), but these findings are rare.
Asymmetric renal size (> 1 cm difference) discovered incidentally during imaging tests, and recurrent
episodes of unexplained acute pulmonary edema or heart failure also suggest renovascular
hypertension.
Diagnosis of Renovascular Hypertension
Initial identification with ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography, or CT angiography
Confirmation with renal angiography (also may be therapeutic)
If renovascular hypertension is suspected, ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography, or CT
angiography are reasonable non-invasive initial tests. Noninvasive testing is less reliable for detecting
fibromuscular dysplasia because of the location of the stenotic lesion (which typically involves the
intrarenal portion of the renal artery).
Renal angiography is the definitive test, which may be done when noninvasive testing is inconclusive
and the clinical suspicion is high.
Duplex Doppler ultrasound can assess renal blood flow and is a reliable, noninvasive method for
identifying significant stenosis (eg, > 60%) in the main renal arteries. Sensitivity and specificity are 85 to
90% when experienced technicians do the test (1). It is less accurate in patients with branch stenosis.
Magnetic resonance angiography is a more accurate and specific noninvasive test to assess the renal
arteries (2). However, concerns about gadolinium-associated complications, including nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis, limit its use, particularly among patients with renal insufficiency.
 2/6

 Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Renovascular Hypertension (Magnetic Resonance Angiography)
IMAGE
IMAGE PROVIDED BY JAN N. BASILE, MD.
CT angiography is another noninvasive test with sensitivities and specificities in the range of 95% (3). Its
use is also limited by exposure to radiocontrast media in patients with renal insufficiency.
Renal angiography is done if noninvasive imaging methods indicate a lesion amenable to angioplasty or
stenting or if the results of other screening tests are inconclusive. Digital subtraction angiography with
selective injection of the renal arteries can also confirm the diagnosis, but angioplasty or stent
placement cannot be done in the same procedure.
Radionuclide imaging is rarely used for diagnostic purposes and is occasionally used as a functional test
to compare blood flow and filtration between the kidneys. Imaging is performed before and after an
oral dose of captopril. The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor causes the affected artery to
narrow, decreasing perfusion on the scintiscan. Narrowing also causes an increase in serum renin,
which is measured before and after captopril administration. This test may be less reliable in patients
with decreased renal function.
 3/6

 Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Renal Artery Stenosis (Digital Subtraction Angiography)
IMAGE
IMAGE PROVIDED BY JAN N. BASILE, MD.
Measurements of renal vein renin activity are sometimes misleading and, unless surgery is being
considered, are not necessary. However, in unilateral disease, a renal vein renin activity ratio of > 1.5
(affected to unaffected side) usually predicts a good outcome with revascularization. The test is done
when patients are depleted of sodium, stimulating the release of renin.
Diagnosis references
1. Williams GJ, Macaskill P, Chan SF, et al. Comparative accuracy of renal duplex sonographic
parameters in the diagnosis of renal artery stenosis: paired and unpaired analysis. AJR Am J
Roentgenol. 2007;188(3):798-811. doi:10.2214/AJR.06.0355
2. Postma CT, Joosten FB, Rosenbusch G, Thien T. Magnetic resonance angiography has a high
reliability in the detection of renal artery stenosis. Am J Hypertens. 1997;10(9 Pt 1):957-963.
doi:10.1016/s0895-7061(97)00157-x
3. Olbricht CJ, Paul K, Prokop M, et al. Minimally invasive diagnosis of renal artery stenosis by spiral
computed tomography angiography. Kidney Int. 1995;48(4):1332-1337. doi:10.1038/ki.1995.418
Treatment of Renovascular Hypertension
Aggressive medical management of hypertension, atherosclerosis, and related disorders
For fibromuscular dysplasia, sometimes angioplasty with or without stent placement
Rarely bypass grafting
Without treatment, the prognosis is similar to that for patients with untreated primary hypertension.
All patients should have aggressive medical management of their hypertension.
 4/6

 Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
For patients with atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis, data from a large, randomized trial (the
cardiovascular outcomes in renal atherosclerotic lesions [CORAL] trial) showed that stent placement did
not improve outcomes compared to medical management alone (1). Although stent placement did
provide a small (-2 mm Hg), statistically significant decrease in systolic blood pressure, there was no
significant clinical benefit for prevention of stroke, myocardial infarction, heart failure, death due to
cardiovascular or renal disease, or progression of kidney disease (including the need for renal
replacement therapy). Importantly, all patients in the CORAL study received aggressive medical
management of their hypertension and diabetes (if present), along with antiplatelet medications and a
statin to manage atherosclerosis.
Thus, the decision to eschew angioplasty must be accompanied by strict adherence to current medical
management guidelines (2). If serum creatinine increases by > 50% with optimal medical treatment for
blood pressure, renal artery stenting may help preserve kidney function (3). For patients unable to
strictly adhere to medical management guidelines and with a > 70% renal artery stenosis, stent
placement may still be considered.
Fibromuscular dysplasia
For most patients with fibromuscular dysplasia of the renal artery, percutaneous transluminal
angioplasty (PTA) is recommended. Placement of a stent reduces the risk of restenosis; antiplatelet
medications (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel) are given afterward. Saphenous vein bypass grafting is
recommended only when extensive disease in the renal artery branches makes PTA technically
unfeasible. Sometimes complete surgical revascularization requires microvascular techniques that can
only be done ex vivo with autotransplantation of the kidney. Cure rate is 90% in appropriately selected
patients; surgical mortality rate is < 1% (4).
Medical treatment is always preferable to nephrectomy in patients whose kidneys cannot be
revascularized for technical reasons.
Treatment references
1. Cooper CJ, Murphy TP, Cutlip DE, et al. Stenting and medical therapy for atherosclerotic renal-
artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(1):13–22. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1310753
2. Writing Committee Members*, Jones DW, Ferdinand KC, et al. 2025
AHA/ACC/AANP/AAPA/ABC/ACCP/ACPM/AGS/AMA/ASPC/NMA/PCNA/SGIM Guideline for the
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical
Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2025;82(10):e212-e316. doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000249
3. Bhalla V, Textor SC, Beckman JA, et al. Revascularization for Renovascular Disease: A Scientific
Statement From the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2022;79(8):e128-e143.
doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000217
4. Modrall JG, Rosero EB, Smith ST, et al. Operative mortality for renal artery bypass in the United
States: Results from the National Inpatient Sample. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48(2):317-322.
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2008.03.014
 5/6

 Renovascular Hypertension - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Stenosis (> 70%) or occlusion of a renal artery can cause hypertension by stimulating
release of renin from juxtaglomerular cells of the affected kidney.
About 80% of cases are caused by atherosclerosis, and 20% by fibromuscular dysplasia.
Suspect a renovascular cause if diastolic hypertension develops abruptly; if new or
previously stable hypertension rapidly worsens within 6 months; or if hypertension is
initially severe (systolic > 180 mm Hg), associated with worsening renal function, or
highly refractory to treatment with medication.
Do ultrasound, magnetic resonance angiography, or CT angiography to identify patients
who should have renal angiography, the definitive test.
Give aggressive medical treatment of hypertension, atherosclerosis, and related
disorders.
For patients with fibromuscular dysplasia, consider percutaneous transluminal
angioplasty and/or stent placement or rarely a vascular bypass graft.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 6/6
