=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Restenosis - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:52.102059",
  "file_size_bytes": 434948,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Restenosis - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Restenosis
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com),
Associate Editor(s)-In-Chief:: Bhaskar Purushottam, M.D. [2] (mailto:bpurushottam@gmail.c
om)
Overview
Restenosis literally means the reoccurrence of stenosis. This is usually restenosis of an artery, or
other blood vessel, but possibly any hollow organ that has been "unblocked". This term is common
in vascular surgery, cardiac surgery, interventional radiology, or interventional cardiology
following angioplasty, all branches of medicine that frequently treat stenotic lesions. In simple
words, coronary restenosis can be considered as the reduction in the lumen diameter after a
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), which induces iatrogenic arterial injury and results in
neointimal tissue proliferation.[1] It can be defined based on angiography or as clinical restenosis.
By angiography, the term 'Binary Angiographic Re-stenosis' is defined as > 50% luminal narrowing
at follow-up angiography.[2] However, the most widely accepted and relevant definition would be a
'Clinical Re-stenosis', which is defined as need for a repeat target lesion revascularization (TLR)
due to symptomatic coronary ischemia from the previously intervened vessel (proposed by the
Academic Research Consortium). Therefore, this definition needs angiographic narrowing as well
as clinical correlation. If the lesion does not meet angiographic criteria, but meets the criteria for a
physiologically significant lesion by fractional flow reserve (FFR) or anatomically by intravascular
ultrasound (IVUS) with the appropriate clinical context, it is still considered 'Clinical Re-stenosis'.
PCI has evolved significantly from plain balloon angioplasty to the development of biodegradable
stents in the last few decades. Currently, almost all coronary interventions use a bare metal stent
(BMS) or more so a drug eluting stent (DES). Hence, the discussion in the following paragraphs
will focus on in-stent re-stenosis of drug eluting and bare metal stents.
Coronary Restenosis
There are probably several mechanisms that lead to restenosis. An important one is the
inflammatory response, which induces tissue proliferation around an angioplasty site.
Cardiologists have tried a number of approaches to decrease the risk of restenosis. Stenting is
becoming more commonplace; replacing balloon angioplasty. During the stenting procedure, a
metal mesh (stent) is deployed against the wall of the artery revascularizing the artery. Other
approaches include local radiotherapy and the use of immunosuppressive drugs, coated onto the
stenting mesh. Analogues of rapamycin, such as tacrolimus (FK-506), sirolimus and more so
everolimus, normally used as immunosuppressants but recently discovered to also inhibit the
proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells, have appeared to be quite effective in preventing
restenosis in clinical trials. Antisense knockdown of c-myc, a protein critical for progression of cell
replication, is another approach to inhibit cell proliferation in the artery wall and has been through
preliminary clinical trials using Morpholino oligos.
Histopathology and Molecular Mechanisms
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 1/10
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
Restenosis can considered a local vascular manifestation of the general biological response to
arterial wall injury. Following vessel wall injury with endothelium damage, the exposure of tunica
media to the flowing blood results in platelet adhesion to the media's collagen via the Von
Williebrand factor. This results in platelet activation, which is followed by aggregation and soon
evolving into a vicious cycle, which feeds and nurtures itself till a clot is formed from the
coagulation cascade (which is activated from the tissue thromboplastin released from the media
following vessel wall injury) and fibrin. Basically, this phenomenon can be considered synonymous
to hemostasis. Activated platelets express adhesion molecules, to which circulating leukocytes
attach and begin the process of leukocyte migration. Also during this process, several chemotactic
factors are released and multiple adhesion molecules are expressed by various activated
inflammatory cells in the vicinity of the inflammation, which cause chemotaxis of leukocytes to the
core of the inflammation. Growth factors, cytokines and adhesion molecules released and
expressed by platelets, leukocytes and other inflammatory cells, result in the migration of vascular
smooth muscle cells from the media and proliferation with resultant neo-intima formation [3] [4]
[5]. Hence, neo-intima consists of vascular smooth muscle cells, macrophages and extracellular
matrix, which has formed over several weeks.
When reading through the above process, we realize that plaque rupture and stent thrombosis uses
the same tools of inflammation mentioned above. The phenomenon of stent thrombosis and acute
coronary syndrome can be thought of as an acute phenomenon, evolving in minutes to a couple of
hours. Thus, depending on several factors (which favor acute thrombosis) the above mentioned
process can evolve very quickly resulting in thrombosis of the coronary vessel. This process can
then follow any of the pathways:
• the patient seeks immediate help and the percutaneous coronary intervention can open up the
vessel and prevent progression of the acute coronary syndrome
• the patient fails to seek help and can die from a massive myocardial infarction
• sometimes, without seeking help, the patient lives through this coronary thrombosis and the
clot becomes organised and recanalised.
In more simple words, coronary restenosis can be thought of as a sub-acute to chronic vascular
inflammatory response to iatrogenic controlled injury; while stent thrombosis is an acute vascular
response resulting in acute thrombosis and a high propensity to cause sudden death or significant
morbidity.
In balloon angioplasty, the lumen size is increased from its baseline diseased state through the
dilatation of the balloon at the site of the diseased region. However, the elastic recoil (of the
artery), negative remodeling, contraction and finally neo-intima formation, results in restenosis.
Also, to be noted is the fact that there is a 30% risk of abrupt closure of the vessel from acute
thrombosis from plain balloon angioplasty as it is a form of vascular injury too (iatrogenic
controlled injury). Based on individual clinical and angiographic characteristics, some patients
develop this fatal complication, while others do not.
In stent implantation, the lumen size is increased from its baseline diseased state and has a better
patency than plain balloon angioplasty, as the stent scaffold holds the vessel open; therefore the
component of elastic recoil and negative remodeling is reduced significantly. Thus the restenosis
rates are lower in BMS when compared to plain balloon angioplasty, as the elastic recoil and
negative remodeling is virtually eliminated. Hence, the final lumen size is greater and neo-intima
formation does not materialize into clinical restenosis as seen to occur more commonly with
balloon angioplasty. Similarly, it is well known that DES has a lower re-stenosis rate than BMS as
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
the DES have the added advantage of releasing anti-stenotic drug which can retard the neo-intima
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 2/10
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
formation. Rapamycin, an immunosuppresant agent approved by the FDA, inhibits both rat and
human vascular smooth muscle proliferation and migration in vitro. A study investigated (1)
whether rapamycin administration could reduce neointimal thickening in a porcine model of
restenosis post-PTCA and (2) the mechanism by which rapamycin inhibits VSMCs in vivo. It was
found that rapamycin administration significantly reduced the arterial proliferative response after
PTCA in the pig by increasing the level of the CDKI p27(kip1) and inhibition of the pRb
phosphorylation within the vessel wall. Therefore, pharmacological interventions that elevate
CDKI in the vessel wall and target cyclin-dependent kinase activity may have a therapeutic role in
the treatment of restenosis after angioplasty in humans[6]. These common pathways finally act on
the cell cycle and result in vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. Given that the anti-stenotic
drug of DES act at the level of the cell cycle, they are thus the most effective strategy available to
prevent coronary restenosis after a percutaneous coronary intervention.
Once again, there are several other factors involved in re-stenosis of BMS and DES (as discussed
below).
Coronary re-stenosis can be considered in two different settings of a percutaneous coronary
intervention:
• In pure balloon angioplasty (in the absence of stenting)- Following balloon angioplasty, there is
injury to the vessel wall, which triggers the expected inflammatory response from the vessel
wall. Hence, there is elastic recoil, negative remodelling (reduction in lumen size due to the
healing process) or contraction, thrombus at the site of injury (i.e., release of prothrombotic
thromboplastin like material from the vessel wall, exposure of the collagen of the media),
smooth muscle proliferation and migration and excessive extracellular matrix production.
• With stenting- Stenting prevents elastic recoil and negative remodelling. However, neointimal
formation progresses and causes re-stenosis, which is reduced with antistenotic drugs.
Restenosis in patients after stent implantation is caused predominantly by neointimal
hyperplasia. However neointima formation in plain balloon angioplasty has a minor role.[7] [8]
Through immunohistochemical identification, it has been shown that there is a steady
accumulation of macrophages within stented segments (with clustering of macrophages around
stent struts), where as there virtually no accumulation within balloon-injured segments of pure
balloon angioplasty.[9] [10]
The porcine model of in-stent restenosis (ISR) has demonstrated the formation of a thick
neointima in 28 days-which may be the reason as to why the earlier DES released their antistenotic
drug by the end of 30 days. However, it is well known that the peak period of ISR development in
humans is approximately 3 to 6 months-hence the newer DES are aiming to release the drug for an
extended period. Interestingly, in these porcine models they found a positive correlation between
the inflammatory infiltrate, degree of arterial injury and extent of stent strut penetration into the
vessel wall with the neointimal thickness. Interestingly, in a rat model of carotid artery dilatation
the gate-keeper step in initiating vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation from tunica media to
intima is the rupture of internal elastic lamina.[11] [8]
The above mentioned responses and time periods were in porcine models with near normal
coronaries and this may not be the case in humans who have had balloon angioplasty, BMS and
DES for atherosclerotic lesions. The inflammatory response in DES is very different in terms of cell
composition and timing, when compared to balloon angioplasty and BMS and also among the
different DES. These differences could be explained by the presence of various forms of polymer
among DES. For example, the inflammatory response (predominantly giant cell infiltrates) to
Sirolimus DES has been shown to persist beyond 180 days and up to 2 years. In contrast, the
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
inflammatory response to BMS and the second generation Everolimus DES (which has a more
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 3/10
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
biocompatible polymer) has been limited to 90 days and 12 months, respectively. Evidence of such
persistence of inflammatory response has been found in autopsy cases and from thrombus
aspirates taken from patients during percutaneous coronary intervention for late stent thrombosis.
As mentioned earlier, the neointima consists of the hyperplastic vascular smooth muscle cells and
the extracellular protein rich matrix. The current evidence points to the fact that these smooth
muscle cells are of luminal origin, however, there is data that indicates that they can be of
adventitial origin too.[12] [13] The later stages of restenosis is contributed predominantly by the
deposition of extracellular matrix.[14] [15]
After reviewing the existing evidence, it seems that migration and proliferation of vascular smooth
muscle cells form the major final common pathway for restenosis. In the presence of growth
factors and cytokines, these vascular smooth cells undergo a phenotypic modulation from a
contractile state to a synthetic phenotype. Hence, most of the molecular research in the past few
years has been focused on understanding the common pathways that multiple receptors employ to
transmit mitogenic signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus of the vascular smooth cells after
arterial injury.[16] [17] The three common pathways which result in pathological mitosis of the
vascular smooth cells are:
• Ras-raf mitogen activated protein kinase
• Cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein kinase dependent signalling
• Cyclin dependent kinase complexes
Several rat models have shown that alteration of these pathways can worsen or prevent neo initmal
formation.[18]
Pathophysiology
In this section we will discuss the etiological and various pathophysiological factors, which lead to
restenosis.
DES predominantly consist of 3 elements:
• Scaffold or the stent platform, which forms the skeleton of the stent (this made of stainless
steel or cobalt chromium).
• The antistenotic drug (such as paclitaxel, everolimus, etc).
• The polymer or the carrier on which the drug is mounted.
Unlike, the DES the BMS consist only the scaffold or the platform.
The pathophysiology seems to be the interplay of clinical characteristics, biological factors,
mechanical factors, technical factors and finally de-novo lesions which arise within the stent itself.
The various pathophysiological factors are discussed as follows:
• Biological and Genetic Factors:
• Drug Resistance: Recent studies have revealed a genetic basis for drug resistance.[19]
Depending on the penetrance and expressivity of these mutations, the sensitivity to these
drugs vary. This resistance can be the result of inherited genetic mutations or acquired
following the exposure of a cytotoxic drug.[20] [21]
• Genetic Factors Affecting the Inflammatory Response: Polymorphism of glycoprotein IIIa
and a mutant form of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase appear to increase the risk of
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
ISR.[22] Interestingly, allele 2 of interleukin IL-1ra gene appears to be protective. However,
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 4/10
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
these are just some of the genetic factors which have been identified in the causation of ISR.
Hence, there remains the possibility of complex multigenic abnormalities (interplay of
multiple variant forms of genes and environmental factors), which can play a significant role
in ISR. These identified and yet to be identified genetic factors may explain as to why some
patients develop ISR and some don’t despite identical clinical factors and stent
characteristics.
• Hypersensitivity: The implantation of these stents is recognized as foreign antigens and
hence a hypersensitivity reaction [23] can be triggered, which can lead to ISR. As mentioned
earlier, the DES has 3 components and the BMS has only the scaffold, which can all
contribute towards this hypersensitivity reaction.
•
•
• Stent Platform: The stent platforms of the BMS and first generation DES (paclitaxel and
sirolimus) is made up of 316L stainless steel, which contains more nickel and
molybdenum than the second generation DES, where the scaffold is made up of cobalt
chromium. This nickel and molybdenum are known to trigger these hypersensitivity
reactions.[24] Interestingly, to date, no prospective studies have confirmed this
association.
•
•
• Polymer: The durable polymer which remains covering the stent after releasing the anti-
stenotic drug has known to cause hypersensitivity and is suspected as the culprit for
stent thrombosis and progressive or late re-stenosis.
•
•
• Matrix Metalloproteinases: Circulating matrix metalloproteinase(MMP) have been
associated with ISR as they play significant roles in migration of vascular smooth cells
and matrix remodelling during healing post-stenting. Elevated levels of MMP-9 at
baseline and MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels 24 hours post-percutaneous coronary
intervention have proven to be strongly associated with the development of ISR following
DES implantation. On the contrary, low and near normal levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9
were associated with a lack of a significant re-stenotic response.
•
•
• Genetic factors: As mentioned above can play a significant role in the inflammatory
response, which can result in ISR.
• B) Arterial Factors:
• Wall Shear Stress: The laminar flow of blood is a well known phenomenon, where the
blood flows the fastest at the vessel center (or at the carina of a bifurcation) and slowest
when it flows closest to the vessel wall (or at the ostium of a bifurcation). Hence, regions of
low shear stress lead to accumulation of biological mediators, which promote atherosclerosis
or neointimal formation. Adapting this principle would mean that a divider or the formation of
a new carina should reduce the incidence of ISR. Kim at al demonstrated reduced
occurrence of ISR by 'shotgun stenting' (i.e., simultaneous V-stenting with the formation of a
new carina in the left main stem or other suitably sized vessels) but conversely, Stinus et al
demonstrated increased target lesion revascularization rate with V-stenting when compared
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 5/10
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
with the 'Crush' technique. This disparity can have a couple of explanations: 1) lesion
location 2) post stent lumen size 3) reference lumen size 4) exposure of the new carina
(formed by stent struts) for thrombus formation.
The presence of patchy areas of low shear stress within stented segments, secondary to local
geometric factors (such as angulation or curvature) can predispose towards increased neointimal
formation and hence ISR. This was demonstrated by Papafaklis et al on 6 month follow-up with
BMS and Paclitaxel DES. However, this was not seen with Sirolimus DES. This difference can be
explained by the differing pharmacological mode of action and shorter drug-release kinetics.
•
• Progression of Atherosclerosis within a Stented Segment: If the necrotic plaque within the
stent progresses or if a lipid core plaque at the stent edge is not covered completely, then
these lesions can progress to cause ISR or even thrombus formation.
•
• "Thrombostenosis" Phenomenon: Oikawa et al was the first to describe the intriguing
theory in which chronic thrombus formation may play an integral role in the development of
ISR.
•
• Vessel Remodelling: The implantation of DES in vessels that have already undergone
positive remodelling secondary to large plaque burden ("Glagov" phenomenon) have an
increased risk for ISR.
• Stent Factors:
• Polymer Release Characteristics: In one the earlier trials involving Paclitaxel, they found
that the duration of the drug release had a far greater impact on the inhibition of neointimal
proliferation than the actual drug dose delivered. Several molecular biological studies have
indicated that the genetic mechanisms responsible for the inflammatory proliferative
response remain potentially active for a period of 21 days after vessel wall injury. These
polymer release kinetics could explain some of the disparities in the ISR among different
DES. It seems clear that when the antistenotic drug is delivered at a set threshold dose for a
sustained prolonged period of time may be required to control the inflammatory proliferative
response and hence reduce the occurrence of ISR.
•
• Non-uniform Drug Distribution:
• Ideally, the anti-stenotic drug should be delivered in a homogeneous fashion to the
vessel wall (i.e., transmural and circumferential). However, due to local blood flow
alterations (secondary to atherosclerotic plaque and calcified lesions), non-compliant
vessels (i.e., calcified, tortuous), strut overlap, stent design, stent gap, vessel curvature,
bifurcation lesions, ostial lesions, stent fracture and polymer damage can result in focal
areas of the vessel receiving sub-optimal anti-stenotic drug.
•
•
• Stent delivery in calcified lesions can result in stripping of the polymer base.
•
•
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 6/10
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
• Finally, individual variations in metal to artery ratio and variability in drug elution can all
contribute to stent re-stenosis.
•
• Strut Thickness: Thicker stent struts have been associated with increased risk of ISR with
BMS and smaller vessels. This could be explained by the fact that the thinner stent strut
would have a lesser dose of foreign body exposure to the vessel wall, hence reducing the
intensity of the inflammatory proliferative response.
•
• On- and Off-Label Use: The STENT group is the largest, multicenter, prospective registry
involving >15,000 patients, evaluating the late outcomes associated with DES implantation
in the United States showed an almost 2 fold increase in target vessel revascularization
(TVR) at 9 months for off-label use (ostial, left main stem, chronic total occlusions,
saphenous venous graft, small or large vessels, multivessel, ST-elevation myocardial
infarction, ISR lesions) when compared to on-label use (short de novo lesions measuring
>2.5mm and <3.5mm for Sirolimus DES or <3.75mm for Paclitaxel DES). Also, when looking
at the SYNTAX study, there were higher TVR rates in patients with highly complex 3-vessel
or left main disease who underwent DES (which was an off-label use of DES). When
analyzing the list of off-label uses, it seems that these patients have complex coronary
lesions (with a higher SYNTAX score), more sicker and have more comorbidities which could
easily influence TVR.
•
• Polymer Disruption, Peeling and Crackling: This can result in exposure of bare-metal
areas, which has been demonstrated in bench studies involving both first and second
generation DES using light or scanning electron microscopy. It is plausible that this bare
metal exposure and stent regions in the absence of anti-stenotic drug can form a nidus for
inflammatory and proliferative response. Seen more so in stent implantation in tortuous
calcified lesions.
• Mechanical Factors:
• Stent Underexpansion: When the stent is deployed and it is not well expanded, it results in
a vessel lumen size whose stent cross-sectional area is significantly smaller that of the
reference lumen size or other cross-sectional areas within the stent, despite good apposition
of the stent struts against the vessel wall. If the minimum stent area is smaller than the
reference lumen size to begin with, then the same amount of neointimal formation would be
of greater significance than in a scenario where the minimum stent area was larger. An
excellent expansion is considered if the minimal cross-sectional area in the stent is >90% of
the average reference cross-sectional area.
•
• Stent Malapposition: In malapposition, the stent struts are not apposed to the vessel wall
(blood occupies the space between the stent struts and vessel wall). It is commonly seen
with undersized stents, tortuous arteries and non-homogeneity in the reference arterial
lumen diameter within the treated segment.
•
• Stent Fracture: It is defined as complete or partial separation of a stent, which was
contiguous on initial implantation. This commonly happens with non-uniform stent expansion
in region with both very compliant and resilient vessel walls. IVUS is an accurate imaging
modality to recognize this abnormality. Partial stent fracture is defined as the absence of
atleast one third or 120 degrees of stent struts for at least 1 frame. Complete stent fracture is
defined Caosok tiehse h eclpo ums dpelleivteer oaubr sseervniccees. Boyf usstinegn otu sr tsreurvtisce ws, yitohui ang rtehee to s otuer nustee odf csoeokgimes.ent for at least 1
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 7/10
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
frame. There have been various classification systems to represent the severity of stent
fracture. The incidence of DES fracture has been reported from 1% to 8%. In fact, in the only
randomized controlled trial reporting the incidence and outcomes of stent fracture in DES
(LONG-DES II study), where they had a follow-up angiography, a 14% incidence of
restenosis was observed.
There are 2 important mechanisms for stent fracture. Firstly, with excessive movements during
myocardial contraction, significant tension is exerted at hinge points where the myocardial
contractility forces act in opposing direction and result in fracture. Secondly, when a stent has a
closed cell design (as seen with Sirolimus DES), the stent cannot dissipate the myocardial
contractility pressures and hence the stent itself succumbs to this force and results in a fracture.
Hence, with these principle mechanisms in mind; long stents, right coronary artery lesions,
excessive tortuosity, angulation and torsion of the vessel, overlapping stents, saphenous vein graft
lesions, tight calcified lesions that have been vigorously post dilated and expanded, myocardial
bridges' sites and closed cell design stents (such as Sirolimus DES) predispose towards stent
fracture.
•
• Technical Factors:
• Barotrauma/Geographical Miss (GM): When a stent is deployed and if its fails to cover
the sites of balloon injury or the atherosclerotic in its entirety, then these missed sites can
become a nidus for re-stenosis. GM can be classified as longitudinal or axial.
Longitudinal GM was defined as injured or diseased stenotic segment, which was not
fully covered by the DES. Whereas, axial GM was defined as inadequate or overzealous
sizing of the balloon, which results in effects similar to stent
underexpansion/malapposition and uncontrolled vessel wall injury (increasing the
stimulus for inflammation and proliferative response, respectively. Hence, the presence
of injured or diseased segment not covered by the stent or balloon-artery ratio <0.9 or
>1.3 was noted to have an increased association with target vessel revascularization and
myocardial infarction at 1 year.
•
•
• Stent Gap: It is simply defined as a discontinuous coverage between 2 stents. A gap
between 2 stents exposes the site of balloon injury as well the lack of anti-stenotic drug
distribution (if it is in between 2 DES) will clearly increase the risk for re-stenosis
•
•
• DES Deployment in a Clot-Laden Segment: Logically, it seems that there is significant
reduction in penetrance of anti-stenotic drug in regions, where the DES is deployed in
clot-laden arterial segment. However, with the widespread use of glycoprotein-IIb/IIIa
inhibitors, potent P2Y12 receptor antagonists and aspiration thrombectomy, these
concerns do not translate into clinical events. This is demonstrated in a recent meta-
analysis of 13 trials (n=7244) has shown significant benefits of DES over BMS in
reducing TVR and recurrent MI (at the end of one year) in STEMI patients.
Clinical Presentation
In-stent restenosis (ISR) can be clinically silent, but majority of them present with recurrent
symptoms of angina. The incidence of recurrent angina pectoris after a percutaneous coronary
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
intervention (PCI) was reported in the past to be around 50% with a wide range. This number may
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 8/10
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
have reduced as most the PCIs end up in a DES as opposed to a BMS. The positive predictive value
of symptoms indicating a significant stenosis is as low as 60%. ISR is often thought to be a benign
phenomenon since the process of neointimal formation and proliferation is of gradual onset and
progressive in nature. Given the pathophysiology of coronary re-stenosis, it is thought that re-
stenosis is a rare cause of acute myocardial infarction or death. However, there are several reports
which have shown that ISR can present as an acute coronary syndrome. 26% to 53% and 3.5% to
20% of BMS ISR can present as unstable angina and myocardial infarction, respectively. Similarly,
16% to 66% and 1% to 20% of DES ISR can present as unstable angina and myocardial infarction,
respectively. A highly stenotic ISR lesion can lead to an non-occlusive thrombus, which can result
in an acute coronary syndrome. Also, patients with clinically silent re-stenosis can be identified on
coronary cineangiograms when neighbouring plaques undergo rupture or intimal tear and present
as an acute coronary syndrome. Sometimes, local plaque rupture or intimal tear can initiate an
inflammatory process which can promote thrombosis of neighbouring stenotic lesions. Thus, it is
important to thoroughly evaluate the patient as coronary re-stenosis can present as an acute
coronary syndrome.
BMS ISR has been reported to occur usually after five and half months after stent implantation.
The time frame for DES ISR presentation is not well-known with one study reporting a mean time
duration of 12 months. Delayed restenosis is known to occur especially with DES. There have been
reports, using intravascular ultrasound that have shown neointimal proliferation to occur even at 4
years after stent implantation. The exact reasons as to why this delayed neointimal proliferation
occurs is not well known. Some of the suspected pathophysiological mechanisms are delayed
healing response, persistent biological reaction caused by the drug present in the polymer, or a
hypersensitivity reaction to the polymer and a possible a genetic predisposition. This eludes to the
fact that the clinician should entertain the possibility of coronary re-stenosis in patients who
present with recurrent angina about 2 years after the stent implantation.
Among the clinical predictors of coronary re-stenosis, diabetes mellitus continues to be a strong
clinical predictor. In a study conducted by Singh et al., they found that patients with treated
diabetes mellitus had a 45% higher risk of restenosis compared with nondiabetics. Interestingly, in
their study they found that current smokers have less restenosis. This smoker's paradox has been
described in the past. Some of the other predictors are increasing age, female sex and chronic renal
disease and patients on hemodialysis. Angiographic and other predictors are listed under the other
sections.
ACCF/AHA/SCAI 2011 Guideline for Percutaneous Coronary
[25]
Intervention: Restenosis (DO NOT EDIT)
Class I
"1. Patients who develop clinical restenosis after balloon angioplasty should be treated with bare metal stent (BMS)
or drug eluting stent (DES) if anatomic factors are appropriate and if the patient is able to comply with and tolerate
dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT).[26] (Level of Evidence: B)"
"2. Patients who develop clinical restenosis after bare metal stent (BMS) should be treated with drug eluting stent
(DES) if anatomic factors are appropriate and the patient is able to comply with and tolerate dual antiplatelet
therapy (DAPT).[27][28][29](Level of Evidence: A)"
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 9/10
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 16:10 Restenosis - wikidoc
Class III (No Benefit)
"1. Patients who develop clinical restenosis after drug eluting stent (DES) may be considered for repeat PCI with
balloon angioplasty, bare metal stent (BMS), or drug eluting stent (DES) containing the same drug or an alternative
antiproliferative drug if anatomic factors are appropriate and the patient is able to comply with and tolerate dual
antiplatelet therapy (DAPT).[1] (Level of Evidence: C)"
Class IIa
"1. IVUS is reasonable to determine the mechanism of stent restenosis.[1] (Level of Evidence: C)"
Related Chapters
• Drug-eluting stent
References
Template:WH Template:WS
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms |
Physical Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance |
Licensing | Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Restenosis 10/10
