=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:49.521344",
  "file_size_bytes": 242201,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
By Tisha Suboc, MD, Rush University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jan 2024 | Modified Dec 2025
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by noncompliant ventricular walls
that resist diastolic filling; one (most commonly the left) or both ventricles may
be affected. Symptoms include fatigue and exertional dyspnea. Diagnosis is by
echocardiography and cardiac catheterization. Treatment is often
unsatisfactory and is best directed at the cause. Surgery is sometimes useful.
A cardiomyopathy is a primary disorder of the heart muscle (see also Overview of Cardiomyopathies).
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is the least prevalent form of cardiomyopathy.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy can affect one or both ventricles. Either type may be diffuse or nondiffuse
(when the disorder affects only one ventricle or part of one ventricle unevenly).
Restrictive cardiomyopathies can be classified into 4 etiologic categories:
Infiltrative (eg, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis)
Non-infiltrative (eg, idiopathic, systemic sclerosis)
Storage diseases (eg, Fabry disease, hemochromatosis)
Endomyocardial disorders (eg, endomyocardial fibrosis, hypereosinophilic syndrome,
carcinoid syndrome, metastatic cancer, drugs [hydroxychloroquine, ergotamine,
methysergide])
Primary restrictive cardiomyopathies include idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy and endomyocardial
fibrosis while the others are considered secondary forms. Some of these are inherited, and others are
acquired (1).
In patients with hypereosinophilic syndrome and extensive endocardial fibrosis, thrombus can form in
the apices and inflow tracts ventricles compromising the size of the ventricular cavities. This type of
restrictive cardiomyopathy is termed obliterative.
General reference
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 1/6
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1. Gowda SN, Ali HJ, Hussain I. Overview of Restrictive Cardiomyopathies. Methodist Debakey
Cardiovasc J 2022;18(2):4-16. Published 2022 Mar 14. doi:10.14797/mdcvj.1078
Etiology of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is not always a primary cardiac disorder. Although the cause is usually
unknown, it may arise as the consequence of systemic or genetic disorders; identified causes are listed
in the table Causes of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy.
Some disorders that cause restrictive cardiomyopathy also affect other tissues (eg, amyloidosis,
hemochromatosis). Some myocardial infiltrative disorders also affect other cardiac tissue. Rarely,
amyloidosis affects coronary arteries. Sarcoidosis and Fabry disease may also affect nodal conduction
tissue. Löffler syndrome (a subcategory of hypereosinophilic syndrome with primary cardiac
involvement), which occurs in the tropics, begins as an acute arteritis with eosinophilia, followed by
thrombus formation on the endocardium, chordae, and atrioventricular (AV) valves, progressing to
fibrosis. Endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE), which occurs in infants and children, affects only the left
ventricle. Endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF) occurs commonly in tropical regions and affects both the left
and right ventricles.
TABLE
Some Causes of Restrictive
Cardiomyopathy
Cause Examples
Carcinoid tumors
Endocardial
fibroelastosis
Endomyocardial fibrosis
(EMF)
Hypereosinophilic
Endomyocardial syndrome (including
disorders Löffler syndrome)
Metastatic cancer
Medications (eg,
hydroxychloroquine,
ergotamine,
methysergide)
Radiation
Infiltrative disorders Amyloidosis
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 2/6
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Examples
Sarcoidosis
Idiopathic restrictive
cardiomyopathy
Non-infiltrative
Pseudoxanthoma
disorders
elasticum
Systemic sclerosis
Fabry disease
Glycogen storage
Storage diseases
diseases
Hemochromatosis
Data from Gowda SN, Ali HJ, Hussain I. Overview of
Restrictive Cardiomyopathies. Methodist Debakey
Cardiovasc J 2022;18(2):4-16. Published 2022 Mar 14.
doi:10.14797/mdcvj.1078
Pathophysiology of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Endocardial thickening or myocardial infiltration (sometimes with death of myocytes, papillary muscle
infiltration, compensatory myocardial hypertrophy, and fibrosis) may occur in one, typically the left, or
both ventricles. As a result, the mitral or tricuspid valves may malfunction, leading to regurgitation. If
nodal and conduction tissues are affected, the sinoatrial (SA) and atrioventricular node malfunction,
sometimes causing various grades of SA block and AV block.
The main hemodynamic consequence is diastolic dysfunction with a rigid, noncompliant ventricle,
impaired diastolic filling, and high filling pressure, leading to pulmonary venous hypertension. Systolic
function may deteriorate if compensatory hypertrophy of infiltrated or fibrosed ventricles is inadequate.
Mural thrombi can form, resulting in systemic emboli.
Symptoms and Signs of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Symptoms of restrictive cardiomyopathy are exertional dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, and peripheral edema. Fatigue results from a fixed cardiac output due to resistance to
ventricular filling. Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and AV block are common; angina and syncope are
uncommon. Symptoms and signs closely mimic those of constrictive pericarditis.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 3/6
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Physical examination detects a quiet precordium, a low-volume and rapid carotid pulse, pulmonary
crackles, and pronounced neck vein distention with a rapid y descent (see figure Normal Jugular Vein
Waves). A third heart sound (S3) and/or a fourth heart sound (S4) may occur and must be differentiated
from the precordial knock of constrictive pericarditis. In some cases, a murmur of functional mitral or
tricuspid regurgitation results because myocardial or endocardial infiltration or fibrosis changes
chordae or ventricular geometry. Pulsus paradoxus does not occur.
Diagnosis of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
ECG, chest x-ray, and echocardiography
MRI
Sometimes left and right heart catheterization, including cardiac biopsy
Laboratory tests and biopsy of other organ systems as needed
Restrictive cardiomyopathy should be considered in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection
fraction, particularly when a systemic disorder known to lead to restrictive cardiomyopathy has already
been diagnosed. However, the underlying disorder may not be obvious on presentation.
ECG, chest x-ray, and echocardiography are required.
The ECG is usually nonspecifically abnormal, showing ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities and
sometimes low voltage. Pathologic Q waves, not due to previous myocardial infarction, sometimes
occur. Left ventricular hypertrophy due to compensatory myocardial hypertrophy or abnormalities of
conduction, including AV block, sometimes occurs.
On chest x-ray, the heart size is often normal or small but can be enlarged in late-stage amyloidosis or
hemochromatosis.
Echocardiography shows normal left ventricular ejection fraction. Tissue Doppler imaging frequently
suggests elevated LV filling pressures, and strain imaging can show impaired longitudinal contraction
despite the normal ejection fraction. Other common findings include dilated atria and myocardial
hypertrophy.
In amyloidosis an unusually bright echo pattern from the myocardium may be observed. Technetium-
99m pyrophosphate cardiac imaging is also useful in differentiating immunoglobulin light chain (AL)
from transthyretin (ATTR) cardiac amyloid. Strongly positive scans are specific for ATTR amyloid. Weakly
positive scans may occur with AL amyloid, recent myocardial infarction, or significant chronic kidney
disease. Because scan results are not always specific, AL amyloid should be ruled out using serum light
chain and urine/serum immunofixation studies. Identifying the type of amyloid has implications for
treatment, genetic counseling, and overall prognosis (1).
If the diagnosis is still in doubt, MRI can show abnormal myocardial texture in disorders with myocardial
infiltration (eg, by amyloid or iron). MRI as well as cardiac CT can detect pericardial thickening, which can
help diagnose pericardial constriction, which can clinically mimic restrictive cardiomyopathy.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 4/6
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cardiac FDG PET (fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography) assessment may be useful to
identify inflammatory myocardial disorders such as cardiac sarcoidosis, which may manifest similarly to
other causes of restrictive cardiomyopathy.
If a definitive diagnosis is not evident after noninvasive testing, invasive work-up with cardiac
catheterization and endomyocardial biopsy should be considered. Catheterization detects high atrial
pressure in restrictive cardiomyopathy with a prominent y descent and an early diastolic dip followed by
a high diastolic plateau in the ventricular pressure curve. Diastolic pressure is usually a few mm Hg
higher in the left ventricle than in the right, in contrast to constrictive pericarditis where pressure in the
ventricles is equal. Biopsy can detect endocardial fibrosis and thickening, myocardial infiltration by iron,
myocardial infiltration by amyloid, chronic myocardial fibrosis, or in the case of Fabry disease, inclusions
in vascular endothelial cytoplasm. Coronary angiography is normal, except when amyloidosis affects
epicardial coronary arteries.
Laboratory tests and biopsies of other organ systems for the most common causes of restrictive
cardiomyopathy (eg, fat pad biopsy for amyloidosis, iron tests or liver biopsy for hemochromatosis)
should be done.
Diagnosis reference
1. Bokhari S, Castaño A, Pozniakoff T, et al: (99m)Tc-pyrophosphate scintigraphy for differentiating
light-chain cardiac amyloidosis from the transthyretin-related familial and senile cardiac
amyloidoses. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 6:195–201, 2013. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.112.000132
Treatment of Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Cause treated
Diuretics considered
If the diagnosis is made at an early stage, specific treatment of some underlying causes, such as
amyloidosis, hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis, and Löffler syndrome, may help.
Diuretics may be used for patients with edema or pulmonary vascular congestion but must be given
cautiously because they can lower preload; the noncompliant ventricles depend on preload to maintain
cardiac output.
Digoxin does little to alter hemodynamic abnormalities and may cause serious arrhythmias in
cardiomyopathy due to amyloidosis, in which extreme digitalis sensitivity is common. If heart rate is
elevated, beta-blockers or rate-limiting calcium channel blockers may be used cautiously in low doses.
Afterload reducers (eg, nitrates) may cause profound hypotension and usually are not useful.
Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) and transplantation are sometimes recommended (1).
Treatment reference
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 5/6
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:42 Restrictive Cardiomyopathy - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
1.Muchtar E, Blauwet LA, Gertz MA: Restrictive cardiomyopathy: Genetics, pathogenesis, clinical
manifestations, diagnosis, and therapy. Circ Res 121:819–837, 2017. doi:
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.310982
Prognosis for Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Prognosis is poor (see table Diagnosis and Treatment of Cardiomyopathies) because the diagnosis is
often made at a late stage. No treatment is available for most patients; symptomatic, supportive care
can be provided.
Standard therapies that are used in dilated cardiomyopathy (eg, angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE]
inhibitors, digoxin, beta-blockers) are poorly tolerated in restrictive cardiomyopathy. Patients with
restrictive cardiomyopathy may also have autonomic dysfunction (especially in amyloid heart disease)
or low systemic blood pressure. There is a high rate of conduction system disease, heart block, and
sudden death.
Key Points
In restrictive cardiomyopathy, endocardial thickening or myocardial infiltration leads to
a rigid, noncompliant ventricle and thus diastolic dysfunction; systolic function is normal
until late in the disease.
Sometimes, valvular tissue or the conduction system is involved, causing valvular
regurgitation or heart block and arrhythmias.
Etiology is usually unknown, but some cases are caused by potentially treatable
disorders, including amyloidosis, hemochromatosis, or sarcoidosis.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography plus testing for cause.
Treatment is often unsatisfactory unless the cause can be addressed; diuretics may
benefit patients with edema or pulmonary vascular congestion but must be used
cautiously to avoid lowering preload.
Standard treatments for dilated cardiomyopathy (eg, ACE inhibitors, digoxin, beta-
blockers) are poorly tolerated in restrictive disease.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/cardiomyopathies/restrictive-cardiomyopathy 6/6
