=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:55.146312",
  "file_size_bytes": 491370,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
By Nowell M. Fine, MD, SM, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Oct 2025
Right heart failure is defined by the clinical syndrome of systemic venous
congestion with or without low cardiac output, secondary to right ventricular
dysfunction. The most common cause of right heart failure is increased
afterload caused by left heart failure. Cor pulmonale is right ventricular (RV)
enlargement and eventual failure secondary to a lung disorder that causes
pulmonary artery hypertension. Findings include peripheral edema, neck vein
distention, hepatomegaly, and a parasternal lift. Diagnosis of right heart failure
is clinical and by echocardiography and cardiac MRI. Treatment is directed at
the cause.
Pathophysiology of Right Heart Failure
Right heart or right ventricular (RV) failure is the failure of the right side of the heart to pump blood
adequately through the pulmonary vasculature at a normal central venous pressure. Right heart failure
often involves right ventricle systolic dysfunction, dilation, or both. In the case of right heart failure
secondary to left heart failure, elevated left heart filling pressure is transmitted retrograde through the
pulmonary vasculature, resulting in pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular pressure overload,
which can be exacerbated by the development of tricuspid valve regurgitation. Tricuspid regurgitation is
typically functional in the setting of either right ventricular enlargement, or right atrial enlargement,
often exacerbated by the presence of atrial fibrillation. Sleep apnea is common in patients with chronic
heart failure, particularly central sleep apnea. The presence of both central and obstructive sleep apnea
can exacerbate right heart failure.
Cor Pulmonale
Cor pulmonale is right heart failure caused by pulmonary hypertension secondary to lung disease,
which can include:
Loss of capillary beds (eg, due to bullous changes in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
[COPD] or thrombosis in pulmonary embolism)
Vasoconstriction caused by hypoxia, hypercapnia, or both
 1/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Increased alveolar pressure (eg, in COPD, during mechanical ventilation)
Medial hypertrophy in arterioles (often a response to pulmonary hypertension due to other
mechanisms)
Pulmonary hypertension increases afterload on the RV, resulting in a cascade of events that is similar to
what occurs in LV failure, including elevated end-diastolic and central venous pressure and ventricular
hypertrophy and dilation. Demands on the RV may be intensified by increased blood viscosity due to
hypoxia-induced polycythemia. Rarely, RV failure affects the LV if a dysfunctional septum bulges into the
LV, interfering with filling and thus causing diastolic dysfunction.
Cor pulmonale results from a disorder of the lung or its vasculature; it does not refer to right ventricular
(RV) enlargement secondary to left ventricular (LV) failure, a congenital heart disorder (eg, ventricular
septal defect), or an acquired valvular disorder. Cor pulmonale is usually chronic but may be acute and
reversible. Primary pulmonary hypertension (ie, not caused by a pulmonary or cardiac disorder) is
discussed elsewhere.
Etiology of Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
The most common cause of right heart failure is left heart failure (1). Isolated right heart failure can be
caused by right-sided congenital or acquired valvular disease, right-sided myocardial infarction,
restrictive cardiomyopathy, pericardial disease, right-heart specific cardiomyopathy such as
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, or obstructive sleep apnea.
Cor pulmonale
Acute cor pulmonale has few causes. Chronic cor pulmonale is usually caused by COPD, but there are
several less common causes (see table Causes of Cor Pulmonale). In patients with COPD, an acute
exacerbation or pulmonary infection may trigger RV overload. In chronic cor pulmonale, risk of venous
thromboembolism is increased.
TABLE
Causes of Cor Pulmonale
Acuity Condition
Massive pulmonary embolization
Acute
Injury due to mechanical ventilation
(most commonly in patients with ARDS)
Chronic COPD*
Extensive loss of lung tissue due to
surgery or trauma
Chronic, unresolved pulmonary emboli
 2/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Acuity Condition
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disorders
Systemic sclerosis
Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
Kyphoscoliosis
Obesity with alveolar hypoventilation
Neuromuscular disorders involving
respiratory muscles
Idiopathic alveolar hypotension
* COPD is the most common cause of chronic cor pulmonale.
ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
Etiology reference
1. Ezekowitz JA, O'Meara E, McDonald MA, et al. 2017 Comprehensive Update of the Canadian
Cardiovascular Society Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol.
2017;33(11):1342-1433. doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2017.08.022
Symptoms and Signs of Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
In RV failure, the most common symptoms are peripheral edema and fatigue. Sometimes patients feel
a sensation of fullness in the abdomen or neck. Hepatic congestion can cause right upper quadrant
abdominal discomfort, and stomach and intestinal congestion can cause early satiety, anorexia, and
abdominal bloating.
Less specific heart failure symptoms include cool peripheries, postural light-headedness, nocturia, and
decreased daytime micturition. Skeletal muscle wasting can occur in severe biventricular failure and
may reflect some disuse but also increased catabolism associated with increased cytokine production.
Significant weight loss (cardiac cachexia) is an ominous sign associated with high mortality.
In older adults, presenting concerns may be atypical, such as confusion, delirium, falls, sudden
functional decline, nocturnal urinary incontinence, or sleep disturbance. Coexisting cognitive
impairment and depression may also influence assessment and therapeutic interventions and may be
worsened by the HF.
Signs of RV failure include:
 3/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Nontender peripheral pitting edema (digital pressure leaves visible and palpable imprints,
sometimes quite deep) in the feet and ankles
Enlarged and sometimes pulsatile liver palpable below the right costal margin
Abdominal swelling and ascites
Visible elevation of the jugular venous pressure, sometimes with large a or v waves that are
visible even when the patient is seated or standing (see figure Normal Jugular Vein Waves)
In severe cases of heart failure, peripheral edema can extend to the thighs or even the sacrum, scrotum,
lower abdominal wall, and occasionally even higher. Severe edema in multiple areas is termed anasarca.
Edema may be asymmetric if patients lie predominantly on one side.
Large v waves in the jugular veins are usually indicative of significant tricuspid regurgitation which is
often present in RV failure. A paradoxical increase in the jugular venous pressure during inspiration
(Kussmaul sign) is indicative of impaired right ventricular filling and can occur in severe RV failure as well
as restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis, and severe tricuspid regurgitation.
With hepatic congestion, the liver may be palpably enlarged or tender, and hepatojugular or abdominal-
jugular reflux may be detected (see Approach to the Cardiac Patient). Precordial palpation may detect
the left parasternal lift of RV enlargement, and auscultation may detect the murmur of tricuspid
regurgitation or the RV third heart sound (S3) along the left sternal border; both findings are augmented
upon inspiration.
Cor pulmonale
Cor pulmonale is initially asymptomatic, although patients usually have significant symptoms (eg,
dyspnea, exertional fatigue) due to the underlying lung disorder. Later, as RV pressures increase,
physical signs commonly include a left parasternal systolic lift, a loud pulmonic component of the
second heart sound (S2), and murmurs of functional tricuspid and pulmonic insufficiency
(regurgitation). Later, an RV gallop rhythm (S3 and fourth [S4] heart sounds) augmented during
inspiration, distended jugular veins (with a dominant a wave unless tricuspid regurgitation is present),
hepatomegaly, and lower-extremity edema may occur.
Diagnosis of Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
Clinical suspicion
Echocardiography and cardiac MRI
Electrocardiogram
Measurement of natriuretic peptide levels
Sometimes right heart catheterization
Right heart failure is a clinical diagnosis, composed of supportive symptoms and physical examination
findings. Cardiac imaging, particularly echocardiography and cardiac MRI, is used to confirm right
ventricular dysfunction, including dilatation and impaired systolic function. Both imaging modalities can
 4/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
identify previously undiagnosed structural, functional, and congenital abnormalities. Right atrial
enlargement and functional tricuspid valve regurgitation are also supportive findings.
Echocardiography can assess RV systolic pressure but is often technically limited by the lung disorder;
Cardiac MRI can quantitatively assess RV size and function. Right heart catheterization may be required
for confirmation. Electrocardiography can identify arrhythmia as well as subtle findings of right ventricle
hypertrophy and dilation and right atrial or ventricular dilation. Measurement of brain (B-type)
natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal-pro-BNP (NT-pro-BNP) levels can support the diagnosis of heart
failure as well as track clinical response over time.
Cor pulmonale
Cor pulmonale should be suspected in all patients with one of its causes. Chest radiograph shows RV
and proximal pulmonary artery enlargement with distal arterial attenuation. ECG evidence of RV
hypertrophy (eg, right axis deviation, QR wave in lead V1, and dominant R wave in leads V1 to V3)
correlates well with degree of pulmonary hypertension. However, because pulmonary hyperinflation
and bullae in COPD cause realignment of the heart, physical examination, radiographs, and ECG may be
relatively insensitive.
Cor Pulmonale (Echocardiogram)
IMAGE
© SPRINGER SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA
Treatment of Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
Treatment of cause
Treatment of right heart failure consists of identifying and treating the underlying cause. When the
cause is left heart failure, guideline-directed treatment strategies for left heart failure apply. Pulmonary
arterial hypertension, congenital heart disease, acquired valvular disease, pericardial disease,
cardiomyopathy, and other causes are treated per standard of care.
 5/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In patients with acute or critical illness, careful attention to preload, as well as afterload and contractility
are the main approaches (1). Cautious diuresis, inotropic support with agents such as milrinone, and
pulmonary vasodilation (in the absence of contraindications) may be helpful.
Symptoms may be managed with loop diuretics. Otherwise, there are no evidence-based targeted
pharmacologic or other forms of therapies (2).
If peripheral edema is present chronically, diuretics may seem appropriate, but they should be used
cautiously because small decreases in preload may result in hypotension. Pulmonary vasodilators (eg,
hydralazine, calcium channel blockers, nitrous oxide, prostacyclin analogs, phosphodiesterase
inhibitors), although beneficial in select Group 1 (primary) pulmonary arterial hypertension patients, are
generally not effective for other causes of cor pulmonale. Intravenous or inhaled agents are sometimes
used in the acute setting in the absence of left heart dysfunction. Bosentan, an endothelin receptor
blocker, also may benefit patients with primary pulmonary hypertension, but its use is not well studied
in cor pulmonale. Digoxin may be used empirically, however evidence is lacking in the absence of LV
dysfunction.
Arrhythmias should also be managed.
See Medications for Heart Failure for more detailed information on specific medication classes.
Cor pulmonale
Treatment of cor pulmonale is difficult; it focuses on the cause (see table Causes of Heart Failure),
particularly alleviation or moderation of hypoxia. Early identification and treatment are important
before structural changes become irreversible.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension-specific therapies, including pulmonary vasodilators, are not typically
indicated for cor pulmonale due to chronic lung disease, although they may play a role in severe cases
(3).
Treatment references
1. Houston BA, Brittain EL, Tedford RJ. Right Ventricular Failure. N Engl J Med. 2023;388(12):1111-
1125. doi:10.1056/NEJMra2207410
2. Ezekowitz JA, O'Meara E, McDonald MA, et al. 2017 Comprehensive Update of the Canadian
Cardiovascular Society Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol.
2017;33(11):1342-1433. doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2017.08.022
3. Blanco I, Hernández-González F, García A, Torres-Castro R, Barberà JA. Management of
Pulmonary Hypertension Associated with Chronic Lung Disease. Semin Respir Crit Care Med.
2023;44(6):826-839. doi:10.1055/s-0043-1770121
Key Points
 6/7

 Right Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagnosis usually requires echocardiography or radionuclide imaging, and sometimes
right heart catheterization.
Early identification and treatment of the cause are important before cardiac structural
changes become irreversible.
Loop diuretics are used cautiously for patients with symptoms or peripheral edema.
Cor pulmonale is RV enlargement and eventually failure secondary to a lung disorder
that causes pulmonary artery hypertension.
Cor pulmonale itself is usually asymptomatic but common physical findings include a
left parasternal systolic lift, a loud pulmonic component of S2, functional tricuspid and
pulmonic regurgitation murmurs, and later, distended jugular veins, hepatomegaly, and
lower-extremity edema.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 7/7
