=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:07.355250",
  "file_size_bytes": 234773,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:51 Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Screening for Sports Participation
By Robert S. McKelvie, MD, PhD, Western University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2024 | Modified Aug 2025
Athletes are commonly screened to identify risk before participation in sports. Screening should
address cardiovascular and other risks.
Screening for Cardiovascular Risks of Sports Participation
Athletes are commonly screened to identify cardiovascular risks before participation in sports. In the
United States, athletes are reevaluated every 2 years (if high school age) or every 4 years (if college age
or older). In Europe, screening is repeated every 2 years regardless of age.
Screening recommendations in the United States for college-age young adults—as well as for
children and adolescents—include the following (1):
History
Physical examination
Selected testing based on findings on history and physical examination
History should include questions about the following:
Known hypertension or heart murmur
Symptoms that are induced by exercise or are unexplained, including syncope (including
convulsive syncope), near-syncope, chest pain, dyspnea, or palpitations
Chest pain, particularly new onset, assessing quality (eg, pleuritic, pressing, burning),
location, duration, intensity, relation to activity, associated symptoms
Family history of sudden cardiac death at age < 50 years, arrhythmias, dilated
cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome, or Marfan syndrome
Use of performance-enhancing or illicit drugs (Visit the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency.) and
medications that predispose to long QT syndrome
In adults, risk factors for coronary artery disease
Physical examination should consist of a cardiovascular examination that includes blood pressure in
both arms, supine and standing cardiopulmonary auscultation, and assessment for other conditions
such as features of Marfan syndrome. These measures aim to identify apparently healthy people at high
risk of life-threatening cardiac events (eg, people with arrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or
other structural heart disorders).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/sports-and-the-heart/screening-for-sports-participation 1/5
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:51 Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
European guidelines differ from American guidelines in that a screening electrocardiogram (ECG) is
recommended for all children, adolescents, and college-age athletes (2).
Canadian Guidelines recommend screening in 3 tiers:
History/questionnaire
Physical examination
ECG only when indicated according to clinical findings
Testing follows if clinically warranted (3).
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
QT Interval Correction (EKG)
Screening for older adults (35 years or older) with risk factors may include incremental symptom-
limited exercise testing, especially if athletes have been sedentary for a number of years.
History and examination are neither sensitive nor specific; false-negative and false-positive findings are
common because prevalence of cardiac disorders in an apparently healthy population is very low. Use
of screening ECG or echocardiography would improve disease detection but would produce even more
false-positive diagnoses and is impractical at a population level.
Genetic testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or long QT syndrome is not recommended or even
feasible for the screening of athletes.
Selected testing
Athletes with a family history or symptoms or signs of, for example hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, long
QT syndrome, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, Brugada syndrome, or Marfan
syndrome, require further evaluation. Typically evaluation includes one or both of the following:
ECG
Echocardiography
Confirmation of any of these disorders may preclude sports participation.
If ECG reveals Mobitz type II heart block, complete heart block, true right bundle branch block, or left
bundle branch block, or there is clinical or electrocardiographic evidence of supraventricular or
ventricular rhythm disorders, a search for cardiac disease is required.
Athletes with presyncope or syncope in whom noninvasive testing is unrevealing should also be
evaluated for anomalous coronary arteries. Evaluation is done using
Cardiac catheterization
If an enlarged aorta is detected on echocardiography (or incidentally), further assessment is needed.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/sports-and-the-heart/screening-for-sports-participation 2/5
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:51 Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Recommendations for sports participation
Athletes should be counseled against use of illicit and performance-enhancing drugs. Patients with mild
or moderate valvular heart disease may participate in vigorous activity.
Certain patients should not participate in competitive sports or high-intensity recreational sports, such
as those who have
Severe valvular heart disease, particularly if stenotic
Most structural or arrhythmogenic heart disorders (eg, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
coronary artery anomalies, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy)
Myocardial infarction within about the previous 6 weeks
Known aneurysms in the brain or large vessels
Acute myocarditis (until resolved, with complete recovery of ventricular function)
Athletes who have had a myocardial infarction will need cardiovascular rehabilitation and a gradual
approach to returning to high-intensity physical activity.
Cardiovascular screening references
1. Maron BJ, Thompson PD, Ackerman MJ, et al: Recommendations and considerations related to
pre-participation screening for cardiovascular abnormalities in competitive athletes: 2007 update:
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity,
and Metabolism: endorsed by the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation
2007;115(12):1643–1655, 2007. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.181423
2. Corrado D, Pelliccia A, Bjørnstad HH, et al: Cardiovascular pre-participation screening of young
competitive athletes for prevention of sudden death: proposal for a common European protocol.
Consensus Statement of the Study Group of Sport Cardiology of the Working Group of Cardiac
Rehabilitation and Exercise Physiology and the Working Group of Myocardial and Pericardial
Diseases of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J 26(5):516–524, 2005.
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehi108
3. Johri AM, Poirier P, Dorian P, et al: Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Heart Rhythm
Society joint position statement on the cardiovascular screening of competitive athletes. Can J
Cardiol 35:1-11, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2018.10.016
Screening for Other Risks of Sports Participation
Athletes should also be screened for musculoskeletal and other risks before participation in sports.
Noncardiovascular risk factors are more common than cardiovascular risk factors. Adults are asked
about the following:
Previous or current musculoskeletal injuries (including easily triggered dislocations)
Arthritic disorders, particularly those involving major weight-bearing joints (eg, hips, knees,
ankles)
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/sports-and-the-heart/screening-for-sports-participation 3/5
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:51 Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Concussions
Asthma
Symptoms suggesting systemic infection
Heat-related illness
Easy bruising or bleeding
Seizures
Two populations at risk for injuries are commonly overlooked:
Boys who physically mature late are assumed to be at greater risk of injury in contact sports
if competing against larger and stronger children.
People with overweight or obesity are at increased risk of musculoskeletal problems
because of excess body weight and associated forces on the joints and tissues. One risk is
overuse injury and soft-tissue inflammation, particularly if people increase intensity and
duration of exercise too rapidly. A long-term risk is osteoarthritis affecting weight-bearing
joints. Another risk may be injury due to sudden stops and starts if they participate in
activities that require jumping or high levels of agility.
Athletes, particularly adolescents and young adults, should be asked about use of illicit and
performance-enhancing drugs. (Visit the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency.)
In girls and young women, screening should detect delayed onset of menarche. Girls and young women
should be screened for the presence of the female athlete triad (eating disorders, amenorrhea or other
menstrual dysfunction, and diminished bone mineral density). Two questions are validated screening
measures for eating disorders:
Have you ever had an eating disorder?
Are you happy with your weight?
Contraindications to Sports Participation
Other than certain cardiovascular disorders, there are almost no absolute contraindications to sports
participation.
Exceptions in children include
Acute splenic enlargement or recent infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus infection)
because splenic rupture is a risk
Symptomatic or persistent fevers, which may decrease exercise tolerance, increase risk of
heat-related disorders, and be a sign of serious illness
Possibly significant diarrhea and/or recent significant vomiting because dehydration is a risk
In adults, relative contraindications are more common and lead to recommendations for
precautions or for participation in some sports rather than others, for example:
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/sports-and-the-heart/screening-for-sports-participation 4/5
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:51 Screening for Sports Participation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
People with a history of frequent and easily triggered dislocations or multiple concussions
should participate in noncollision sports.
Males, particularly those with a single testis, should wear a protective cup for most contact
sports.
People, particularly those at risk of heat intolerance and dehydration (eg, those with
diabetes, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease or trait, or previous heat-related illness), should
hydrate frequently during prolonged activity.
People with suboptimal seizure control should avoid swimming, weight lifting, and, to
prevent injury to others, sports such as archery and riflery.
People who have asthma need to monitor their symptoms closely.
Key Points
Screen younger participants (children through young adults) with history and physical
examination; those with abnormal findings or positive family history should have ECG
and/or echocardiography.
Screen older participants with risk factors (particularly if they have been sedentary for a
number of years) with history, physical examination, and usually an exercise stress test.
Recommend against participation in athletes with severe valvular disease and most
structural or arrhythmogenic heart disorders (eg, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy).
Recommend against participation in children with acute splenic enlargement or recent
infectious mononucleosis, symptomatic or persistent fever, and significant diarrhea or
vomiting that predispose them to dehydration until these conditions are resolved.
In all patients, limit participation in specific sports based upon concurrent medical
conditions.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/sports-and-the-heart/screening-for-sports-participation 5/5
