=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Supraventricular tachycardia - wikidoc.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:05.672208",
  "file_size_bytes": 860437,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Supraventricular tachycardia - wikidoc.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Search WikiDoc
Search Try Exact Match
Supraventricular tachycardia
For patient information click here
Editor-In-Chief: C. Michael Gibson, M.S., M.D. [1] (mailto:charlesmichaelgibson@gmail.com);
Associate Editor(s)-in-Chief: Abdelrahman Ibrahim Abushouk, MD[2] (mailto:aabushou@bidmc.har
vard.edu)
Synonyms and keywords: SVT
Overview
There are several classification systems for supraventricular tachycardia, based on site of origin, QRS
width, pulse regularity, and AV node dependence. There are different types of supraventricular
tachycardia, including sinus tachycardia, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, sinus node re-entry
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, AV nodal re-entry tachycardia, AV reciprocating tachycardia,
junctional tachycardia, multifocal atrial tachycardia, and Wolff-Parkinson White syndrome. The general
symptoms of SVTs include anxiety, chest pain or sensation of tightness, dizziness or fainting, palpitations,
shortness of breath, syncope in cases of AVNRT, and sweating. The individual subtypes of SVT can be
distinguished from each other by certain physiological and electrical characteristics, many of which
present in the patient's EKG. Supraventricular tachycardias must be differentiated from each other
because the management strategies may vary. In general, SVT is not life threatening, but episodes should
be treated or prevented. While some treatment modalities can be applied to all SVTs with impunity, there
are specific therapies available to cure some of the different sub-types. Cure requires intimate knowledge
of how and where the arrhythmia is initiated and propagated. SVTs can be separated into two groups,
based on whether they involve the AV node for impulse maintenance or not. Those that involve the AV
node can be terminated by slowing conduction through the AV node. Those that do not involve the AV
node will not usually be stopped by AV nodal blocking maneuvers. These maneuvers are still useful
however, as transient AV block will often unmask the underlying rhythm abnormality. Once the acute
episode has been terminated, ongoing treatment may be indicated to prevent a recurrence of the
arrhythmia. Patients who have a single isolated episode, or infrequent and minimally symptomatic
episodes usually do not warrant any treatment except observation. Patients who have more frequent or
disabling symptoms from their episodes generally warrant some form of preventative therapy. A variety of
drugs including simple AV nodal blocking agents like beta-blockers and verapamil, as well as
antiarrhythmics may be used, usually with good effect, although the risks of these therapies need to be
weighed against the potential benefits.
Classification
There are several classification systems for supraventricular tachycardia, based on site of origin, QRS
width, pulse regularity, and AV node dependence.[1][2]
• Supraventricular tachycardia can be classified based on the site of origin into:
• Physiological sinus tachycardia
• Atrial tachycardia
• Atrioventricular tachycardia
• Supraventricular tachycardia can be classified based on QRS width into:
• Narrow complex tachycardia: Sinus tachycardia, atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, focal/multifocal atrial
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. OK
tachycardia, Sinus node re-entry, AVNRT, and junctional tachycardia.
 1/7

• Wide complex tachycardia: AF with aberrations and AF with WPW.
• Supraventricular tachycardia can be classified based on pulse regularity into:
• Regular: Sinus tachycardia, atrial flutter, Sinus node re-entry tachycardia, AVNRT, and junctional
tachycardia.
• Irregular: Atrial fibrillation and multifocal atrial tachycardia
• Supraventricular tachycardia can be classified based on AV node dependence into:
• AV node dependent: AVNRTs and AVRTs
• AV node independent: Focal atrial tachycardia and atrial flutter
•
Causes
Causes by Organ System
There are several causes of supraventricular tachycardia in almost all body systems.[3][4] A
comprehensive list can be found in the table below.
Air embolism, amyloidosis, aortic regurgitation, aortic stenosis, arteriovenous fistula,
atrial ischemia, atrial myxoma, atrial septal defect, cardiac tamponade, cardiac
tumors, cardiomyopathy, Chagas heart disease, congestive heart failure, constrictive
pericarditis, coronary artery bypass graft surgery, coronary artery disease, dilated
cardiomyopathy, Ebstein's anomaly, endocarditis, familial atrial fibrillation, familial
atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia, heart bypass surgery, heart failure,
hemochromatosis, holiday heart syndrome, hypertensive heart disease, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, hypokalemia, hypotension, hypoxia, ischemic heart disease,
Cardiovascular
Kawasaki disease, left ventricular hypertrophy, Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome, LQT
type 4, Lutembacher syndrome, mahaim fiber tachycardia, mitral regurgitation, mitral
valve stenosis, myocardial infarction, myocarditis, neonatal coxsackie myocarditis,
open heart surgery, pericarditis, peripartum cardiomyopathy, post cardiac surgery,
pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension, rheumatic heart disease, shock, sick
sinus syndrome, stroke, temporary cardiac pacing, tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid
stenosis, unstable angina, uremic pericarditis, valvular heart disease, Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome
Chemical/Poisoning Breath spray, carbon monoxide poisoning, cyanide, grayanotoxin, mercury poisoning
Dental No underlying causes
Dermatologic Psoriatic arthritis
Albuterol, alprazolam, amiodarone, amphetamines, amrinone, atomoxetine, atropine,
beta blockers, caffeine, carbamazepine poisoning, cimetidine, clonidine, conivaptan,
diazoxide, dicobalt edetate, diltiazem, disopyramide, dobutamine, docetaxel,
dopexamine, doxapram, doxorubicin, ephedrine, epirubicin, fentanyl, flecainide,
flumazenil, fluvoxamine, guanethidine, hexamethonium, hydralazine, ibutilide,
isoprenaline, isoproterenol infusion, lithium, methamphetamines, methyldopa,
Drug Side Effect
methylphenidate, methysergide, minoxidil, nelarabine, nicotine, orlistat, palonosetron,
paroxetine, phenoxybenzamine, phentolamine, porfimer sodium, pramipexole,
procainamide, propafenone, quinidine, ramucirumab, reserpine, ritodrine,
romidepsin, salbutamol, salmeterol, sargramostim, sibutramine, theophylline,
trimethaphan, type Ia antiarrhythmic agents, type Ic antiarrhythmic agents, type III
antiarrhythmic agents, verapamil
Ear Nose Throat No underlying causes
Amyloidosis, diabetes mellitus, fatigue, hemochromatosis, hyperthyroidism,
Endocrine
hypoglycemia, hypothyroidism, pheochromocytoma, thyrotoxicosis
Environmental No underlying causes
Gastroenterologic Crohn's disease, hemochromatosis, ulcerative colitis
Channelopaties, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, hemochromatosis, LQT type 4,
Genetic
muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy
Hematologic Anemia, fat embolism, fatigue, hemochromatosis
Cardiac surgery, cardiac transplantation, incomplete ablation procedures, post
Iatrogenic
cardiac surgery, postoperative complication, surgery
Amoebiasis, chagas heart disease, diphtheria, fever, leptospirosis, Lyme disease,
Infectious Disease myocarditis, myotonic dystrophy, neonatal coxsackie myocarditis, rheumatic fever,
salmonella typhosa, sepsis, trichinosis, viral infections
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, fat embolism, hemochromatosis, muscular
Musculoskeletal/Orthopedic
dystrophy
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy, fat embolism, fatigue, Guillain-Barré syndrome,
Neurologic
obstructive sleep apnea, stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage
Nutritional/Metabolic Dehydration, hypercapnia, hypervitaminosis D, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia
Obstetric/GynecologicCookies help unso dneimlivmeurn oeu hry sderrovpisc efest.a Bliys, u pseinripga oruturm s ecravridcioesm, yyoopua athgyr,e per etog noaunrc uyse of cookies.
 2/7

atrial myxoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, cardiac tumors, fatigue, lung cancer,
Oncologic
pheochromocytoma
Ophthalmologic No underlying causes
Alcohol overdose, alcohol withdrawal, aminophylline toxicity, binge drinking,
Overdose/Toxicity carbamazepine poisoning, cocaine overdose, digitalis toxicity, salicylate poisoning,
tricyclic antidepressant overdose
Psychiatric Anxiety, bulimia nervosa, fatigue, panic disorder, psychological stress
Air embolism, bronchogenic carcinoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
Pulmonary emphysema, fat embolism, hypoxia, lung cancer, pneumonia, sarcoidosis, tension
pneumothorax
Chronic kidney disease, chronic renal failure, dehydration, electrolyte disturbance,
Renal/Electrolyte
renal insufficiency
Amyloidosis, ankylosing spondylitis, collagen vascular disease, juvenile idiopathic
Rheumatology/Immunology/Allergy arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis, rheumatic fever, rheumatic heart disease,
sarcoidosis, scleroderma, spondyloarthritis
Sexual No underlying causes
Trauma Cardiac injury from blunt trauma, drowning, electric shock
Urologic No underlying causes
Miscellaneous Binge drinking, drowning, fever, hypothermia, malignant hyperthermia, pain, stress
Differentiating Among the Different Types of Supraventricular Tachycardia
The individual subtypes of SVT can be distinguished from each other by certain physiological and
electrical characteristics, many of which present in the patient's EKG. Supraventricular tachycardias must
be differentiated from each other because the management strategies may vary[5].
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 3/7

PR QRS Response to
Epidemiology Rate Rhythm P waves
Interval complex maneuvers
Less than
0.12–0.20 0.12
Upright,
More common sec and seconds, May break
Sinus Greater than consistent,
in children and Regular shortens consistent, with vagal
Tachycardia 100 bpm and normal in
elderly. with high and normal maneuvers
morphology
heart rate in
morphology
Less than
0.12
More common seconds,
in the elderly, consistent, Does not
following Absent, and normal break with
Atrial 110 to 180 Irregularly
bypass surgery, fibrillatory Absent in adenosine or
Fibrillation bpm irregular
in mitral valve waves morphology vagal
disease, in the maneuvers
hyperthyroidism absence of
aberrant
conduction
Conduction
75 (4:1
Varies Less than may vary in
block), 100
Sawtooth depending 0.12 response to
(3:1 block)
More common pattern of P upon the seconds, drugs and
and 150 (2:1
Atrial Flutter in the elderly, Regular waves at 250 magnitude consistent, maneuvers
block) bpm,
after alcohol to 350 beats of the and normal dropping the
but 150 is
per minute block, but in rate from 150
more
is short morphology to 100 or to
common
75 bpm
Accounts for
60%-70% of all Cannot be
SVTs. 80% to In adults the calculated Less than
The P wave is
90% of cases range is 140- as the P 0.12 May break
AV Nodal usually
are due to 250 bpm, but wave is seconds, with
Reentry superimposed
antegrade in children Regular generally consistent, adenosine or
Tachycardia on or buried
conduction the rate can obscured and normal vagal
(AVNRT) within the
down a slow exceed 250 by the in maneuvers
QRS complex
pathway and bpm QRS morphology
retrograde up a complex
fast pathway.
A retrograde
More common
P wave is Less than
in males,
seen either at 0.12 May break
AV whereas
the end of the Less than seconds, with
Reciprocating AVNRT is more More rapid
Regular QRS complex 0.12 consistent, adenosine or
Tachycardia common in than AVNRT
or at the seconds and normal vagal
(AVRT) females, occurs
beginning of in maneuvers
at a younger
the ST morphology
age.
segment
> 95 beats
per minute.
The disorder is
A nocturnal Less than
uncommon.
reduction in Normal 0.12 Does not
Most patients Normal
Inappropriate heart rate is morphology seconds, break with
are in their late and <
Sinus present. Regular and precede consistent, adenosine or
20s to early 0.20
Tachycardia There is an the QRS and normal vagal
30s. More seconds
inappropriate complex in maneuvers
common in
heart rate morphology
women.
response on
exertion.
Less than
Common after The P
Usually 0.12 Does not
heart surgery, wave is
inverted, may seconds, break with
Junctional digitalis toxicity, > 60 beats usually
Regular be burried in consistent, adenosine or
Tachycardia as an escape per minute buried in
the QRS and normal vagal
rhythm in AV the QRS
complex in maneuvers
block complex
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.morphology
 4/7

Variable Less than
P waves of
PR 0.12 Does not
Multifocal High incidence Atrial rate is varying
intervals, seconds, terminate with
Atrial in the elderly > 100 beats morphology
Irregular RR consistent, adenosine or
Tachycardia and in those per minute from at least
intervals, and normal vagal
(MAT) with COPD (bpm) three different
and PP in maneuvers
foci
intervals morphology
Less than
Between 2% Upright P Does often
0.12
and 17% waves terminate with
Sinus Node seconds,
among 100 to 150 precede each Short PR vagal
Reentry Regular consistent,
individuals bpm regular, interval maneuvers
Tachycardia and normal
undergoing narrow QRS unlike sinus
in
EKG for SVTs complex tachycardia.
morphology
Delta wave
and
evidence of
ventricular
pre-
Estimated
Atrial rate is P wave excitation if May break in
prevalence of
Wolff- nearly 300 generally there is response to
WPW Less than
Parkinson- bpm and follows the conduction procainamide,
syndrome is Regular 0.12
White ventricular QRS complex to the adenosine,
100 - 300 per seconds
syndrome rate is at 150 due to a ventricle vagal
100,000 in the
bpm. bypass tract via ante- maneuvers
entire world.
grade
conduction
down an
accessory
pathway
Differentiating Supraventricular Tachycardia from Ventricular Tachycardia
For a detailed discussion of how to distinguish ventricular tachycardia (VT) from supraventricular
tachycardia (SVT), please visit the wide complex tachycardia differential diagnosis page.
In brief, the diagnosis of VT is more likely if:
• There is a history of myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure or structural heart disease
• VT is more common in the elderly
• The electrical axis is -90 to -180 degrees (a “northwest” or “superior” axis)
• The QRS is > 140 msec
• There is AV dissociation. P waves are normal in morphology, upright, but dissociated from the QRS
complex (i.e. "march through" the QRS complex)
• There are positive or negative QRS complexes in all the precordial leads
• The morphology of the QRS complexes resembles that of a previous premature ventricular
contraction (PVC).
• Rate: More than 100 bpm and usually 150-200 bpm
• Rhythm: The rhythm is regular
• PR interval: Variable PR interval
• Response to Maneuvers: VT does not terminate in response to adenosine or vagal maneuvers
Diagnosis
Symptoms
Symptoms that are common to all types of SVT include the following[6]:
• Anxiety
• Chest pain orC osoekniess ahetilpo uns odefl itviegrh otunr esesrsvices. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 5/7

• Dizziness, or lightheadedness (near-faint), or fainting
• Lightheadedness
• Palpitations (the sensation of the heart racing, fluttering or pounding strongly in the chest or the
carotid arteries)
• Shortness of breath
• Syncope in cases of AVNRT
• Sweating
Electrocardiogram
Shown below is an EKG depicting a tachycardia at a rate of 190/min with narrow QRS complexes indicating supraventricular tachycardia.
Shown below is an EKG recording of a patient who goes from sinus rhythm to a wide complex tachycardia at about 130/min.
• The wide QRS though disappears after nine complexes and is replaced by narrow complexes at a
slightly slower rate.
• No P wave activity is seen.
• This is a supraventricular tachycardia with a form of aberrancy.
• In this case, we are probably seeing a rate-dependent left bundle branch block or the effect of a left
bundle branch block which persists for the nine complexes because of continued block in the left
bundle from the depolarizations from the intact right bundle.
Treatment
Acute Treatment
• In general, SVT is not life threatening, but episodes should be treated or prevented. While some
treatment modalities can be applied to all SVTs with impunity, there are specific therapies available to
cure some of the different sub-types[7].
• Cure requires intimate knowledge of how and where the arrhythmia is initiated and propagated.
• The SVTs can be separated into two groups, based on whether they involve the AV node for impulse
maintenance or not.
• Those that involve the AV node can be terminated by slowing conduction through the AV node.
• Those that do not involve the AV node will not usually be stopped by AV nodal blocking maneuvers.
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 6/7

• These maneuvers are still useful however, as transient AV block will often unmask the underlying
rhythm abnormality[8].
Acute Pharmacotherapy
• Another modality involves treatment with medications[9].
• Pre-hospital care providers and hospital clinicians might administer adenosine, an ultra short acting
AV nodal blocking agent.
• If this works, follow-up therapy with diltiazem, verapamil or metoprolol may be indicated.
• SVT that does NOT involve the AV node may respond to other anti-arrhythmic drugs such as sotalol
or amiodarone.
• In pregnancy, metoprolol is the treatment of choice as recommended by the American Heart
Association[8].
Prevention
• Once the acute episode has been terminated, ongoing treatment may be indicated to prevent a
recurrence of the arrhythmia[10].
• Patients who have a single isolated episode, or infrequent and minimally symptomatic episodes
usually do not warrant any treatment except observation.
• Patients who have more frequent or disabling symptoms from their episodes generally warrant some
form of preventative therapy.
• A variety of drugs including simple AV nodal blocking agents like beta-blockers and verapamil, as well
as antiarrhythmics may be used, usually with good effect, although the risks of these therapies need to
be weighed against the potential benefits[11].
References
Template:WikiDoc Sources
Navigation WikiDoc | WikiPatient | Up To Date Pages | Recently Edited Pages | Recently Added Pictures
Table of Contents In Alphabetical Order | By Individual Diseases | Signs and Symptoms | Physical
Examination | Lab Tests | Drugs
Editor Tools Create a New Page | Become an Editor | Editors Help Menu | Upload a Picture or File | Maintain Pages | What Pages Link Here
There is no pharmaceutical or device industry support for this site and we need your viewer supported Donations | Editorial Board | Governance | Licensing |
Disclaimers | Avoid Plagiarism | Policies
Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies.
 7/7
