=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:41.658004",
  "file_size_bytes": 360763,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Syncope
By Andrea D. Thompson, MD, PhD, University of Michigan;
Michael J. Shea, MD, Michigan Medicine at the University of Michigan
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2024
Syncope is a sudden, brief loss of consciousness with loss of postural tone followed by spontaneous
revival. The patient is motionless and limp and usually has cool extremities, a weak pulse, and shallow
breathing. Sometimes brief involuntary muscle jerks occur, resembling a seizure.
Near-syncope is light-headedness and a sense of an impending faint without loss of consciousness. It is
usually classified and discussed with syncope because the causes are the same.
Seizures can cause sudden loss of consciousness but are not considered syncope. However, seizures
must be considered in patients presenting for apparent syncope because history may be unclear or
unavailable, and some seizures do not cause tonic-clonic convulsions. Furthermore, a brief (< 5 second)
seizure sometimes occurs with true syncope.
Diagnosis depends on a careful history, eyewitness accounts, or fortuitous examination during the
event.
Pathophysiology of Syncope
Most syncope results from insufficient cerebral blood flow. Some cases involve adequate flow but with
insufficient cerebral substrate (oxygen, glucose, or both).
Insufficient cerebral blood flow
Most deficiencies in cerebral blood flow result from decreased cardiac output (CO).
Decreased CO can be caused by
Cardiac disorders that obstruct outflow
Cardiac disorders of systolic dysfunction
Cardiac disorders of diastolic dysfunction
Arrhythmias (too fast or too slow)
Conditions that decrease venous return
Outflow obstruction can be exacerbated by exercise, vasodilation, and hypovolemia (particularly in
aortic stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), which may precipitate syncope.
 1/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Arrhythmias cause syncope when the heart rate is too fast to allow adequate ventricular filling (eg > 150
to 180 beats/minute) or too slow to provide adequate output (eg, < 30 to 35 beats/minute).
Venous return can be decreased by hemorrhage, increased intrathoracic pressure, increased vagal tone
(which can also decrease heart rate), and loss of sympathetic tone (eg, from medications, carotid sinus
pressure, autonomic dysfunction). Syncope involving these mechanisms (except for hemorrhage) is
often termed vasovagal or neurocardiogenic and is common and benign.
Orthostatic hypotension, a common benign cause of syncope, results from failure of normal
mechanisms (eg, sinus tachycardia, vasoconstriction, or both) to compensate for the temporary
decrease in venous return that occurs with standing.
Cerebrovascular disorders (eg, strokes, transient ischemic attacks) rarely cause syncope because most
of them do not involve the centrencephalic structures that must be affected to cause loss of
consciousness. However, basilar artery ischemia, due to transient ischemic attack, stroke, or migraine,
may cause syncope. Rarely, patients with severe cervical arthritis or spondylosis develop vertebrobasilar
insufficiency with syncope when the head is moved in certain positions.
Insufficient cerebral substrate
The central nervous system (CNS) requires oxygen and glucose to function. Even with normal cerebral
blood flow, a significant deficit of either will cause loss of consciousness . In practice, hypoglycemia is
the primary cause because hypoxia rarely develops in a manner causing abrupt loss of consciousness
(other than in flying or diving incidents). Loss of consciousness due to hypoglycemia is seldom as abrupt
as in syncope or seizures because warning symptoms occur (except in patients taking beta-blockers);
however, the onset may be unclear to the examiner unless the event was witnessed.
Etiology of Syncope
Causes are usually classified by the mechanism (see table Some Causes of Syncope).
The most common causes are
Vasovagal (neurocardiogenic)
Idiopathic
Many cases of syncope never have a firm diagnosis but lead to no apparent harm. A smaller number of
cases have a serious cause, usually cardiac.
TABLE
Some Causes of Syncope
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Cardiac outflow or inflow obstruction
 2/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Valvular disease: Aortic Young or old patient
stenosis, mitral stenosis,
Syncope often exertional;
tetralogy of Fallot, Echocardiography
recovery prompt
prosthetic valve
dehiscence or thrombosis Heart murmur
Young or old patient
Syncope often exertional;
recovery prompt
Hypertrophic
Heart murmur (in
cardiomyopathy (HCM), Echocardiography
hypertrophic
restrictive cardiomyopathy
cardiomyopathy)
S4 (in restrictive
cardiomyopathy)
Syncope may be positional
Usually a murmur
Cardiac tumors or thrombi (possibly variable) Echocardiography
Peripheral embolic
phenomena
Usually from large
Sometimes D-dimer
embolus, accompanied by
Pulmonary embolism, Sometimes POCUS or
dyspnea, tachycardia, or
amniotic fluid embolism, echocardiography
tachypnea
or, rarely, air embolism
CT angiography or nuclear
Often risk factors for
scan
pulmonary embolism
Cardiac arrhythmia
Bradyarrhythmias (eg, due Syncope occurring without If ECG unclear, consider
to sinus node dysfunction, warning; recovery Holter monitor, event
high-grade atrioventricular immediate on awakening recorder, or occasionally
block, medications†) an implantable loop
May occur in any position
recorder (duration of
Bradyarrhythmias more monitoring determined by
common in older adults frequency of symptoms)
Patient taking Electrophysiologic testing
medications, especially if abnormalities detected
antiarrhythmics or other or strongly suspected
medications that block AV
 3/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
nodal conduction in
Serum electrolytes if
susceptible patients
clinical reason for
abnormality (eg, diuretic
Structural heart disease
use, vomiting, diarrhea)
If ECG unclear, consider
Holter monitor or event
Tachyarrhythmias, either
Syncope occurring without
recorder, or occasionally
supraventricular or
warning; recovery
an implantable loop
ventricular (eg, due to
immediate on awakening
recorder (duration of
ischemia, heart failure,
monitoring determined by
myocardial disease, May occur in any position
frequency of symptoms)
medications†, electrolyte
Patient taking
abnormalities, Electrophysiologic testing
medications, especially
arrhythmogenic right if abnormalities detected
antiarrhythmics or other
ventricular or strongly suspected
medications that prolong
cardiomyopathy, long QT
the QT interval
Serum electrolytes if
syndrome, Brugada
clinical reason for
Structural heart disease
syndrome, preexcitation)
abnormality (eg, diuretic
use, vomiting, diarrhea)
Ventricular dysfunction
Serum troponin
Acute myocardial Syncope a rare presenting
ECG
infarction, myocarditis, symptom of myocardial
Echocardiography
systolic or diastolic infarction (most such
(traditional, POCUS, or
dysfunction, patients are older), with
both)
cardiomyopathy arrhythmia or shock
Sometimes cardiac MRI
Echocardiography
(traditional, POCUS, or
Pericardial tamponade or Jugular venous elevation;
both)
constriction pulsus paradoxus > 10
Sometimes CT
Vasovagal (neurocardiogenic)
Increased intrathoracic Warning symptoms (eg, Clinical evaluation
pressure (eg, tension dizziness, nausea,
pneumothorax, cough, sweating); recovery usually
straining to urinate or prompt but not immediate
defecate, Valsalva (5 to 15 minutes) although
maneuver)
 4/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
can be prolonged in rare
cases
Precipitant usually
apparent
Warning symptoms (eg,
dizziness, nausea,
sweating); recovery
prompt but not immediate
Strong emotion (eg, pain,
Clinical evaluation
(5 to 15 minutes, but
fear, sight of blood)
sometimes up to hours)
Precipitant usually
apparent
Warning symptoms (eg,
dizziness, nausea,
sweating); recovery
prompt but not immediate
(5 to 15 minutes, but
Carotid sinus pressure Clinical evaluation
sometimes up to hours)
Precipitant usually
apparent (eg, turning
head, button collar,
shaving)
Warning symptoms (eg,
dizziness, nausea,
sweating); recovery
prompt but not immediate
Swallowing (rare) Clinical evaluation
(5 to 15 minutes, but
sometimes up to hours)
Precipitant usually
apparent
Medication administration,
insect bite, allergy history,
Anaphylaxis other signs of anaphylaxis Allergy testing
(eg, rash, wheezing,
hypotension)
Orthostatic hypotension
 5/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Symptoms developing
within several minutes of Clinical evaluation
assuming upright position
Medications†
Sometimes tilt table
Drop in BP with standing testing
during examination
Symptoms developing
within several minutes of Clinical evaluation
assuming upright position
Autonomic dysfunction
Sometimes tilt table
Drop in BP with standing testing
during examination
Symptoms developing
within several minutes of Clinical evaluation
Deconditioning caused by
assuming upright position
Sometimes tilt table
prolonged bed rest
Drop in BP with standing testing
during examination
Chronic fatigue,
Complete blood count or
Anemia sometimes dark stools,
hematocrit
heavy menses
Symptoms developing
Basic metabolic panel
within several minutes of
Endocrine disorders (eg, Morning cortisol
assuming upright position
adrenal insufficiency, measurement
Often associated
hypothyroidism)
Thyroid stimulating
symptoms of underlying
hormone (TSH)
endocrine disorder
Cerebrovascular
Basilar artery transient Sometimes cranial nerve
MRI or CT
ischemic attack, or stroke deficits and ataxia
Aura with visual
symptoms, photophobia;
Migraine Clinical evaluation
often unilateral, but may
be bilateral
Other
Apparent by history; no
Prolonged standing Clinical evaluation
other symptoms
 6/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*
Healthy female of
childbearing age; no other
symptoms
Pregnancy Urine pregnancy test
Usually an early or
unrecognized pregnancy
Often tingling around
mouth or on fingers prior
to syncope
Hyperventilation Clinical evaluation
Usually in context of an
emotional situation
Altered mental status until
treated, onset seldom
Fingerstick glucose
abrupt, sweating,
Hypoglycemia
piloerection Response to glucose
infusion
Usually history of diabetes
or insulinoma
Not true syncope (patient
may be partially or
inconsistently responsive
during events)
Psychiatric disorders Clinical evaluation
Normal examination
Often history of psychiatric
disorder
* ECG and pulse oximetry are done for all.
† See table Some Medications That Cause Syncope.
AV = atrioventricular; BP = blood pressure; POCUS = point-of-care ultrasound; S4 = fourth
heart sound.
TABLE
Some Medications That Cause Syncope
Mechanism Example
 7/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Mechanism Example
Amiodarone, other rate-limiting drugs
Beta-blockers
Bradyarrhythmia
Calcium channel blockers (not
dihydropyridines)
Digoxin
Any medication that prolongs
repolarization* (eg, some
Tachyarrhythmia antiarrhythmics, some antipsychotics,
some antidepressants, some
antihistamines, some fluoroquinolones)
Most antihypertensives (rarely beta-
blockers)
Antipsychotics (mainly phenothiazines)
Doxorubicin
Levodopa
Diuretics (eg, loop diuretics such as
furosemide; thiazide diuretics such as
Orthostatic hypotension
hydrochlorothiazide)
Nitrates (with or without a
phosphodiesterase inhibitor for erectile
dysfunction)
Quinidine
Tricyclic antidepressants
Vincristine
For more information, see Porta L, Lee MG, Hsu WT, Hsu TC, Tsai TY, Lee CC:
Fluoroquinolone use and serious arrhythmias: A nationwide case-crossover
study. Resuscitation 139:262–268, 2019. doi:10.1016/j.resuscitation.2019.04.030
Evaluation of Syncope
Evaluation should be done as soon as possible after the event. The more remote the syncopal event, the
more difficult the diagnosis. Information from witnesses is quite helpful and best obtained as soon as
 8/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
possible. Guidelines for evaluation and management are available from the Canadian Cardiovascular
Society (1) and the American College of Cardiology (2).
History
History of present illness should ascertain events leading up to the syncope, including the patient’s
activity (eg, exercising, arguing, in a potentially emotional situation), position (eg, lying or standing), and,
if standing, for how long. Important associated symptoms immediately before or after the event include
whether there was a sense of impending loss of consciousness, nausea, sweating, blurred or tunnel
vision, tingling of lips or fingertips, chest pain, or palpitations. Length of time recovering should also be
ascertained. Witnesses, if any, should be sought and asked to describe events, particularly the presence
and duration of any seizure activity.
Review of systems should ask about any areas of pain or injury, episodes of dizziness or near-syncope
upon arising, and episodes of palpitations or chest pain with exertion. Patients should be asked about
symptoms suggesting possible causes, including bloody or tarry stools, heavy menses (anemia);
vomiting, diarrhea, or excess urination (dehydration or electrolyte abnormalities); and risk factors for
pulmonary embolism (recent surgery or immobilization, known cancer, previous clots or
hypercoagulable state).
Past medical history should ask about previous syncopal events, known cardiovascular disease, and
known seizure disorders. Medications used should be identified (particularly antihypertensives,
diuretics, vasodilators, and antiarrhythmics—see table Some Medications that Cause Syncope). Family
history should note presence at a young age of heart disease or sudden death in any family member.
Physical examination
Vital signs are essential. Heart rate and blood pressure are measured with the patient supine and after
3 minutes of standing. Pulse is palpated for irregularity.
General examination notes patient’s mental status, including any confusion or hesitancy suggesting a
postictal state and any signs of injury (eg, bruising, swelling, tenderness, tongue bite).
The heart is auscultated for murmurs; if present, any change in the murmur with a Valsalva maneuver,
standing, or squatting is noted.
Careful evaluation of the jugular venous waves (see figure Normal Jugular Vein Waves) while palpating
the carotid or auscultating the heart may allow diagnosis of an arrhythmia if an ECG is not available. For
example, cannon "a" waves occur when the atria contraction takes place against a closed tricuspid valve
and indicate atrial-ventricular dissociation.
The abdomen is palpated for tenderness, and a rectal examination is done to check for gross or occult
blood.
A neurologic examination is done to identify any focal abnormalities, which suggest a central nervous
system cause (eg, seizure disorder).
 9/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Red flags
Certain findings suggest a more serious etiology:
Syncope during exertion
Multiple recurrences within a short time
Heart murmur or other findings suggesting structural heart disease (eg, chest pain)
Older age
Significant injury during syncope
Family history of sudden unexpected death, exertional syncope, or unexplained recurrent
syncope or seizures
Interpretation of findings
Although the cause is often benign, it is important to identify the occasional life-threatening cause (eg,
tachyarrhythmia, heart block) because sudden death is a risk. Clinical findings (see table Some Causes of
Syncope) help suggest a cause in many cases. A few generalizations are useful.
Benign causes often lead to syncope.
Syncope precipitated by unpleasant physical or emotional stimuli (eg, pain, fright), usually
occurring in the upright position and often preceded by vagally mediated warning
symptoms (eg, nausea, weakness, yawning, apprehension, blurred vision, diaphoresis),
suggests vasovagal syncope.
Syncope that occurs most often when assuming an upright position (particularly in older
patients after prolonged bed rest or in patients taking medications in certain classes)
suggests orthostatic syncope.
Syncope that occurs after standing for long periods without moving is usually due to venous
pooling.
Dangerous causes are suggested by red flag findings.
Syncope with exertion suggests cardiac outflow obstruction or exercise-induced
arrhythmia. Such patients sometimes also have chest pain, palpitations, or both. Cardiac
findings may help identify a cause. A harsh, late-peaking, basal murmur radiating to the
carotid arteries suggests aortic stenosis; a systolic murmur that increases with the Valsalva
maneuver and disappears with squatting suggests hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Syncope that begins and ends suddenly and spontaneously is typical of cardiac causes,
most commonly an arrhythmia.
Syncope while lying down also suggests an arrhythmia because vasovagal and orthostatic
mechanisms do not cause syncope in the recumbent position.
Syncope accompanied by injury during the episode increases the likelihood of a cardiac
cause or seizure, and therefore the event is of greater concern. The warning signs and
slower loss of consciousness that accompany benign vasovagal syncope somewhat reduce
the likelihood of injury.
 10/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Loss of consciousness during a seizure or postictal confusion can sometimes be confused with syncope,
but muscular jerking or convulsions that last more than a few seconds, incontinence, drooling, or
tongue biting, if present, usually point to a seizure.
Testing
Testing typically is done:
ECG
Pulse oximetry
Sometimes echocardiography
Sometimes tilt table testing
Blood tests only if clinically indicated
Central nervous system imaging rarely indicated
In general, if syncope results in an injury or is recurrent (particularly within a brief period), more
intensive evaluation is warranted. Cardiac and brain imaging are not done unless indicated by clinical
findings (suspected cardiac etiology or neurologic deficits).
Patients with suspected arrhythmia, myocarditis, or ischemia should be evaluated as inpatients. Others
may be evaluated as outpatients.
ECG is done for all patients. The ECG may reveal arrhythmia, a conduction abnormality, ventricular
hypertrophy, pre-excitation, QT prolongation, Brugada syndrome, pacemaker malfunction, myocardial
ischemia, or myocardial infarction (3). If the diagnosis is questionable after this basic evaluation,
measuring cardiac biomarkers and obtaining serial ECGs to rule out MI in older patients plus ECG
monitoring for at least 24 hours are prudent.
Any detected arrhythmia must be associated with altered consciousness in order to be implicated as the
cause, but most patients do not experience syncope during monitoring. On the other hand, the
presence of symptoms in the absence of rhythm disturbance helps rule out a cardiac cause. An event
recorder (which can record cardiac rhythm for longer periods) may be useful if warning symptoms
precede syncope. A signal-averaged ECG may identify predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias in
patients with ischemic heart disease, suspected arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, or in
patients during the post-myocardial infarction period. If syncopal episodes are infrequent (eg, <
1/month), an implantable loop recorder can be used for longer term recording. This device continuously
records the rhythm and can be interrogated by an external machine that allows the cardiac rhythm to
be printed.
Pulse oximetry should be done during or immediately after an episode to identify hypoxemia (which
may indicate pulmonary embolism). If hypoxemia is present, CT angiography is indicated to rule out
pulmonary embolism.
Laboratory tests are done based on clinical suspicion; reflexively obtained laboratory panels are of
little use. However, all females of childbearing age should have a pregnancy test. Hematocrit is
measured if anemia is suspected. Electrolytes are measured only if an abnormality is clinically
 11/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
suspected (eg, by symptoms or medication use). Serum troponin is measured if acute myocardial
infarction is suspected.
Echocardiography (either point-of-care ultrasound [POCUS] or a traditional echocardiogram) is
indicated for patients with clinically unexplained syncope, exercise-induced syncope, cardiac murmurs,
or suspected intracardiac tumors (eg, those with positional syncope).
Stress testing (exercise or pharmacologic) is done when intermittent myocardial ischemia is suspected.
It is often done for patients with exercise-induced symptoms. Exercise testing is less valuable unless
physical activity precipitated syncope.
Tilt table testing may be done if history and physical examination indicate vasodepressor or other
reflex-induced syncope. It is also used to evaluate exercise-induced syncope if echocardiography or
exercise stress testing is negative.
Invasive electrophysiologic testing is considered if noninvasive testing does not identify arrhythmia in
patients with any of the following:
Unexplained recurrent syncope
Unexplained red flag findings
Ischemic cardiomyopathy, non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, and adult congenital disease, or
unexplained syncope that does not otherwise meet criteria for an implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator (ICD) used for primary prevention
An electrophysiologic study that is negative for an inducible abnormal rhythm defines a low-risk
subgroup with a high rate of remission of syncope. The use of electrophysiologic testing is controversial
in other patients.
EEG is warranted if a seizure disorder is suspected.
CT and MRI of the head and brain are indicated only if signs and symptoms suggest a focal CNS
disorder.
Evaluation references
1. Primary Writing Committee, Sandhu RK, Raj SR, et al: Canadian Cardiovascular Society Clinical
Practice Update on the Assessment and Management of Syncope. Can J Cardiol 36(8):1167–1177,
2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2019.12.023
2. Writing Committee Members, Shen WK, Sheldon RS, et al: 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the
evaluation and management of patients with syncope: A report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society. Heart Rhythm 14(8):e155–e217, 2017. doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2017.03.004
3. Dovgalyuk J, Holstege C, Mattu A, Brady WJ: The electrocardiogram in the patient with
syncope. Am J Emerg Med 25(6):688–701, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2006.12.016
Treatment of Syncope
 12/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In witnessed syncope, pulses are checked immediately. If the patient is pulseless, CPR is begun. If pulses
are present, severe bradycardia is treated with atropine or external transthoracic pacing. Isoproterenol
can be used to maintain adequate heart rate while a temporary pacemaker is placed.
Tachyarrhythmias are treated; a direct-current synchronized shock is quicker and safer than
medications for patients who are not stable. Inadequate venous return is treated by keeping the patient
supine, raising the legs, and giving IV normal saline. Tamponade is relieved by pericardiocentesis.
Tension pneumothorax requires insertion of a pleural cannula and drainage.
Anaphylaxis is treated with parenteral epinephrine.
Placing the patient in a horizontal position with legs elevated typically ends the syncopal episode if life-
threatening disorders are ruled out. If the patient sits upright too rapidly, syncope may recur; propping
the patient upright or transporting the patient in an upright position may prolong cerebral
hypoperfusion and prevent recovery.
Specific treatment depends on the cause and its pathophysiology. Driving and use of machinery should
be prohibited until the cause is determined and treated.
Geriatrics Essentials: Syncope
The most common cause of syncope in older adults is postural hypotension due to a combination of
factors. Factors include rigid, noncompliant arteries, reduced skeletal muscle pumping of venous return
due to physical inactivity, and degeneration of the sinoatrial node and conduction system due to
progressive structural heart disease.
In older adults, syncope often has more than one cause. For example, the combination of taking several
heart and blood pressure medications and standing in a hot church during a long or emotional service
may lead to syncope even though no single factor might cause syncope.
Key Points
Syncope results from global central nervous system dysfunction, usually resulting from
insufficient cerebral blood flow.
Most syncope results from benign causes.
Some less common causes involve cardiac arrhythmia or outflow obstruction and are
serious or potentially fatal.
Vasovagal syncope usually has an apparent trigger, warning symptoms, and a few
minutes or longer of postrecovery symptoms.
Syncope due to cardiac arrhythmias typically occurs abruptly and with quick recovery.
Treatment is directed at the underlying disorder.
 13/14

 Syncope - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
If a benign etiology is not clear, driving and use of machinery should be prohibited until
the cause is determined and treated—the next manifestation of an unrecognized
cardiac cause may be fatal.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 14/14
