=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:02.095829",
  "file_size_bytes": 733830,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
By Mark A. Farber, MD, FACS, University of North Carolina;
Federico E. Parodi, MD, University of North Carolina School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2024
A thoracic aortic diameter ≥ 50% larger than normal is considered an aneurysm
(normal diameter varies by location). Most thoracic aortic aneurysms do not
cause symptoms, although some patients have chest or back pain; other
symptoms and signs are usually the result of complications (eg, dissection,
compression of adjacent structures, thromboembolism, rupture). Risk of
rupture is proportional to the size of the aneurysm. Diagnosis is made by CT
angiography or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Treatment is
endovascular stent grafting or surgery.
(See also Overview of Aortic Aneurysms.)
Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) are abnormal dilatations of the aorta above the diaphragm. TAAs
account for one-fourth of aortic aneurysms. Males and females are affected equally.
Locations of TAAs (1) include
Ascending thoracic aorta (between the aortic root and brachiocephalic, or innominate,
artery): 46%
Aortic arch (including the brachiocephalic, carotid, and subclavian arteries): 21%
Descending thoracic aorta (distal to the left subclavian artery): 35%
Complications
Complications of TAAs include
Aortic dissection
Compression or erosion into adjacent structures
Leak or rupture
Thromboembolism
Aneurysms of the ascending aorta sometimes affect the aortic root, causing aortic valve regurgitation,
or occlusion of the coronary arterial ostia, causing angina, myocardial infarction, or syncope.
 1/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
General reference
1. Gouveia E Melo R, Silva Duarte G, Lopes A, et al. Incidence and Prevalence of Thoracic Aortic
Aneurysms: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Population-Based Studies. Semin Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2022;34(1):1-16. doi:10.1053/j.semtcvs.2021.02.029
Etiology of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Most thoracic aortic aneurysms result from
Atherosclerosis
Risk factors for both thoracic aortic aneurysms and aortic dissections include prolonged hypertension,
dyslipidemia, and smoking. Additional risk factors for TAAs include presence of aneurysms elsewhere in
the body, infection, aortitis, and older age (peak incidence at age 65 to 70 years).
Congenital connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Loeys-Dietz
syndrome) cause cystic medial necrosis, a degenerative change that leads to TAAs complicated by aortic
dissection and by widening of the proximal aorta and aortic valve (annuloaortic ectasia), which causes
aortic regurgitation. Marfan syndrome causes 50% of cases of annuloaortic ectasia, but cystic medial
necrosis and its complications can occur in young people even if no congenital connective tissue
disorder is present.
Infected (mycotic) TAAs result from hematogenous spread of systemic or local infections (eg, sepsis,
pneumonia), lymphangitic spread (eg, tuberculosis), or direct extension (eg, in osteomyelitis or
pericarditis). Bacterial endocarditis and tertiary syphilis are uncommon causes.
TAAs occur in some vasculitic disorders (eg, giant cell arteritis, Takayasu arteritis, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis).
Blunt chest trauma can cause a pseudoaneurysm (false aneurysm) due to injury to the aortic wall
resulting in a communication between the arterial lumen and overlying connective tissue and blood
leaking outside the confines of the aorta; a blood-filled cavity forms outside the vessel wall and seals the
leak as it thromboses).
Symptoms and Signs of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Most thoracic aortic aneurysms are asymptomatic until complications (eg, thromboembolism, rupture,
aortic regurgitation, dissection) develop. However, compression of adjacent structures can cause back
pain (due to compression of vertebra), cough or wheezing (due to compression of the tracheobronchial
tree), dysphagia (due to esophageal compression), hoarseness (due to left recurrent laryngeal or vagus
nerve compression), chest pain (due to coronary artery compression), and superior vena cava syndrome
(due to compression of the central veins or superior vena cava).
 2/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Erosion of aneurysms into the lungs causes hemoptysis or pneumonitis; erosion into the esophagus
(aortoesophageal fistula) causes massive hematemesis.
Dissection manifests with tearing chest pain, often radiating to the back between the shoulder blades.
Thromboembolism may cause stroke, abdominal pain (due to mesenteric ischemia), or extremity pain.
Ruptured TAA that is not immediately fatal manifests with severe chest or back pain and hypotension
or shock. Exsanguination due to rupture most commonly occurs into the pleural or pericardial space.
Additional signs include Horner syndrome (miosis, ptosis, anhidrosis) due to compression of
sympathetic ganglia, palpable downward pull of the trachea with each cardiac contraction (tracheal tug),
and tracheal deviation. Visible or palpable chest wall pulsations, occasionally more prominent than the
left ventricular apical impulse, are unusual but may occur.
Syphilitic aneurysms of the aortic root classically lead to aortic regurgitation and inflammatory stenosis
of the coronary artery ostia, which may manifest as chest pain due to myocardial ischemia. Syphilitic
aneurysms do not dissect.
Diagnosis of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Incidental radiograph finding
Confirmation by CT angiography (CTA), magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), or
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
Thoracic aortic aneurysms are usually first suspected when a chest radiograph incidentally shows a
widened mediastinum or enlargement of the aortic knob. However, chest radiography has poor
sensitivity for TAA and is not a reliable diagnostic tool (eg, in patients with chest pain and suspected
aortic aneurysm). Chest radiograph abnormalities or symptoms and signs suggesting an aneurysm
should be followed up with a cross-sectional imaging test; choice among these tests is based on
availability and local experience (1).
 3/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Widened Mediastinum
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
If rupture is suspected, TEE (for ascending dissection) or CTA, depending on availability, should be done
immediately. Chest CTA can delineate aneurysm size and proximal or distal extent, detect leakage, and
identify coincidental pathology. MRA may provide similar detail. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
can delineate aneurysm size and extent and detect leakage of aneurysms of the ascending but not
descending aorta. TEE cannot show the entire thoracic aorta, but it can be extremely useful in detecting
the entry point in aortic dissection.
Contrast angiography provides the best image of the arterial lumen, but it is not the preferred imaging
study. It gives no information on extraluminal structures (ie, as an alternative diagnosis), it is invasive,
 4/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
and it has a significant risk of renal and extremity atheroembolism and contrast nephropathy.
Aortic root dilation or unexplained ascending aorta aneurysms warrant serologic testing for syphilis. If a
mycotic aneurysm is suspected, bacterial and fungal blood cultures are done.
Diagnosis reference
1. Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Hamilton Black J 3rd, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease: A Report of the American Heart
Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Circulation 2022;146(24):e334-e482. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Treatment of Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Control of hypertension and other comorbidities
Endovascular stent grafting or open surgical repair
Immediate control of hypertension is essential.
Medical management with optimal control of hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and respiratory
disease is the appropriate treatment until surgery is indicated. Treatment is endovascular stent grafting
when anatomically possible and open surgical repair for more complex aneurysms.
Ruptured TAAs, if untreated, are universally fatal. They require immediate intervention, as do leaking
aneurysms and those that cause acute dissection or acute valvular regurgitation.
Transcatheter-placed endovascular stent grafts (endografts) for descending TAAs and
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAAs) are a less invasive alternative to open surgery.
Surgery involves a median sternotomy (for ascending and aortic arch aneurysms) or left thoracotomy
or thoracoretroperitoneal exposure (for descending and TAAs) and replacement with a synthetic graft.
With emergency open surgery, the mortality rate at 1 month is approximately 30 to 50% (1). Patients
who survive have a high incidence of serious complications (eg, renal failure, respiratory failure, severe
neurologic damage).
Elective surgery is indicated for aneurysms that are
Large
Rapidly enlarging (> 0.5 cm/year)
Causing bronchial compression
Causing aortobronchial or aortoesophageal fistulas
Symptomatic
Traumatic
Mycotic
 5/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Aneurysms of the ascending aorta are generally considered large if the diameter is > 5.5 cm or twice the
native size of the ascending aorta or if the aortic size index (aortic diameter in relation to body surface
2
area) is ≥ 2.75 cm/m . In the descending aorta, aneurysms are generally considered large if they are > 6
cm. In patients with Marfan syndrome, large aneurysms are those that are ≥ 4.5 to 5 cm in any location.
Treatment of mycotic aneurysms is aggressive antimicrobial therapy directed at the specific pathogen.
Generally, these aneurysms must also be surgically repaired.
Although open surgical repair of an intact TAA improves outcome, mortality rate may still exceed 7% at
30 days (2). The mortality rate is lower with endovascular stent grafts, although life-long surveillance is
still required (3). Risk of death increases greatly if aneurysms are complicated (eg, located in the aortic
arch or thoracoabdominal aorta) or if patients are older or have coronary artery disease, symptoms, or
preexisting renal insufficiency. Perioperative complications (eg, stroke, spinal injury, acute renal failure)
occur in about 10 to 20% (4).
Asymptomatic aneurysms that do not meet criteria for elective surgical or endovascular repair are
treated with aggressive blood pressure control using a beta-blocker and other antihypertensives if
necessary. Smoking cessation is essential. Dyslipidemia, diabetes, and respiratory diseases should all be
treated.
Patients require frequent follow-ups to check for symptoms and serial CT or ultrasound every 6 to 12
months. Imaging frequency depends on aneurysm size.
Treatment references
1. Latz CA, Boitano L, Schwartz S, et al. Contemporary mortality after emergent open repair of
complex abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg 2021;73(1):39-47.e1.
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2020.03.059
2. Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after open versus endovascular thoracic aortic
aneurysm repair in an observational study of the Medicare population. Circulation
2011;124(24):2661-2669. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.033944
3. Desai ND, Burtch K, Moser W, et al. Long-term comparison of thoracic endovascular aortic repair
(TEVAR) to open surgery for the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2012;144(3):604-611. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.05.049
4. Tanaka A, Leonard SD, Sandhu HK, et al. Open Descending and Thoracoabdominal Aortic
Repairs in Patients Younger Than 50 Years Old. Ann Thorac Surg 2019;108(3):693-699.
doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2019.03.058
Prognosis for Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
Thoracic abdominal aneurysms enlarge an average of 3 to 5 mm/year. Risk factors for rapid
enlargement include larger size of aneurysm, location in the descending aorta, and presence of mural
thrombi.
 6/7

 Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
The risk of rupture appears to rise abruptly as TAAs reach 6 cm in diameter. Median diameter at
aneurysm rupture is approximately 6 cm for ascending aneurysms and 7 cm for descending aneurysms
(1, 2); smaller aneurysms also may rupture, especially in patients with connective tissue disorders or
saccular aneurysms.
Survival rate of patients with untreated large TAAs is 25% at 2 years. TAA rupture has a mortality of 97%
(3).
Prognosis references
1. Coady MA, Rizzo JA, Hammond GL, Kopf GS, Elefteriades JA. Surgical intervention criteria for
thoracic aortic aneurysms: a study of growth rates and complications. Ann Thorac Surg
1999;67(6):1922-1958. doi:10.1016/s0003-4975(99)00431-2
2. Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic
aneurysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac Surg 2002;73(1):17-28. doi:10.1016/s0003-
4975(01)03236-2
3. Zvara DA. Thoracoabdominal aneurysm surgery and the risk of paraplegia: contemporary
practice and future directions. J Extra Corpor Technol 2002;34(1):11-17.
Key Points
Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is a ≥ 50% increase in diameter of the thoracic aorta.
TAAs may dissect, compress, or erode into adjacent structures, cause
thromboembolism, leak, or rupture.
Median diameter at aneurysm rupture is 6 cm for ascending aneurysms and 7 cm for
descending aneurysms.
Diagnosis is often first suspected based on an incidental radiograph or CT finding, and
confirmed using CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, or transthoracic
echocardiography.
Treat small, asymptomatic TAAs with aggressive management of blood pressure and
dyslipidemia and smoking cessation.
Treat larger or symptomatic TAAs with endovascular stent grafting when anatomically
possible and open surgical repair for more complex aneurysms.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 7/7
