=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:52.837206",
  "file_size_bytes": 166192,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:49 Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Thromboangiitis Obliterans
(Buerger Disease)
By William Schuyler Jones, MD, Duke University Health System
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jul 2025
Thromboangiitis obliterans is inflammatory thrombosis of small and medium-
sized arteries and some superficial veins, causing arterial ischemia in distal
extremities and superficial thrombophlebitis. Tobacco use is the primary risk
factor. Symptoms and signs include claudication, nonhealing foot ulcers, rest
pain, and gangrene. Diagnosis is by clinical findings, noninvasive vascular
testing, angiography, and exclusion of other causes. Treatment is primarily
centered on tobacco cessation. Prognosis is excellent when tobacco use is
stopped, but when it is not, the disorder inevitably progresses, often requiring
amputation.
Thromboangiitis obliterans occurs almost exclusively in patients who use tobacco (nearly all of them are
people who smoke) and predominantly affects men aged 30 to 45 years; it rarely occurs in women (1).
Prevalence is highest in Asia and the Middle East where there is heavy tobacco use.
Thromboangiitis obliterans produces segmental inflammation in small and medium-sized arteries and,
frequently, in superficial veins of the extremities. In acute thromboangiitis obliterans, occlusive thrombi
accompany neutrophilic and lymphocytic infiltration of the intima; endothelial cells proliferate, but the
internal elastic lamina remains intact. In an intermediate phase, thrombi organize and recanalize
incompletely; the media is preserved but may be infiltrated with fibroblasts. In older lesions, periarterial
fibrosis may occur, sometimes affecting the adjacent vein and nerve.
The cause is unknown, although cigarette smoking is a primary risk factor. The mechanism involves
oxidative stress, and may involve delayed hypersensitivity or toxic angiitis. According to another theory,
thromboangiitis obliterans may be an autoimmune disorder caused by cell-mediated sensitivity to types
I and III human collagen, which are constituents of blood vessels.
General reference
1. Shekouhi R, Mumtaz M, Naqvi H, et al. Treatment Options for Buerger Disease: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of Outcomes. J Surg Res 2025;306:371-381. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2024.12.034
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/peripheral-artery-disorders/thromboangiitis-obliterans 1/4
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:49 Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms and Signs of Thromboangiitis Obliterans
Symptoms and signs are those of arterial ischemia and superficial venous thrombosis. Some patients
have a history of migratory phlebitis, usually in the superficial veins of a foot or leg.
Onset is gradual, starting in the most distal vessels of the upper and lower extremities with coldness,
numbness, tingling, or burning. These symptoms may develop before objective evidence of disease.
Raynaud phenomenon is common. Intermittent claudication occurs in the affected extremity (usually in
the arch of the foot or in the leg; rarely in the hand, arm, or thigh) and may progress to rest pain.
Frequently, if pain is severe and persistent, the affected leg feels cold, sweats excessively, and becomes
cyanotic, probably because of sympathetic nerve overactivity. Later, most patients develop ischemic
ulcers, which may progress to gangrene.
Pulses are impaired or absent in one or more pedal arteries and often at the wrist. In young men who
smoke and have extremity ulcers, a positive Allen test (the hand remains pale after the examiner
simultaneously compresses the radial and ulnar arteries, then alternately releases them) suggests the
disorder. Pallor with elevation and rubor with dependency frequently occur in affected hands, feet, or
digits. Ischemic ulceration and gangrene, usually of one or more digits, may occur early in the disorder
but not acutely. Noninvasive tests show greatly decreased blood flow and pressure in the affected toes,
feet, and fingers.
Diagnosis of Thromboangiitis Obliterans
Other causes of ischemia excluded by testing
Angiography
History and physical examination suggest the diagnosis. It is confirmed when:
The ankle-brachial index (ratio of ankle to arm systolic blood pressure) for legs or
segmental pressures for arms indicates distal ischemia
Echocardiography excludes cardiac emboli
Blood tests (eg, measurement of antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, complement,
anticentromere antibody, anti-scleroderma [SCL] 70 antibody) exclude vasculitis
Tests for antiphospholipid antibodies exclude antiphospholipid syndrome (although these
levels may be slightly elevated in thromboangiitis obliterans)
Angiography shows characteristic findings (segmental occlusions of the distal arteries in the
hands and feet, tortuous, corkscrew collateral vessels around occlusions, and no
atherosclerosis)
Treatment of Thromboangiitis Obliterans
Smoking cessation
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/peripheral-artery-disorders/thromboangiitis-obliterans 2/4
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:49 Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Local measures
Sometimes medication therapy
Endovascular or surgical revascularization, in cases of chronic limb-threatening ischemia
Treatment is centered on cessation of tobacco use. Continuing to use tobacco inevitably leads to
disease progression and severe ischemia, often requiring amputation.
Other measures include:
Avoiding cold
Avoiding medications that can cause vasoconstriction
Avoiding thermal, chemical, and mechanical injury, especially injury due to poorly fitting
footwear
For patients in the first phase of smoking cessation, IV prostacyclin therapy may help prevent
amputation (1). Phosphodiesterase inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and thromboxane inhibitors,
and endothelin inhibitors may be tried empirically, but data to support their use are limited (2).
Use of antiendothelial cell antibody measurements to follow the course of disease is being studied.
Endovascular or surgical revascularization appear to have a reasonable safety profile and outcomes in
the setting of chronic limb-threatening ischemia (2, 3).
Treatment references
1. Melillo E, Lucaccini E, Berchiolli R, et al. Long-term survival of patients with critical limb ischemia
treated with iloprost: response rate and predictive criteria. A retrospective analysis of 102
patients. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2016;20(24):5233-5241.
2. Shekouhi R, Mumtaz M, Naqvi H, et al. Treatment Options for Buerger Disease: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of Outcomes. J Surg Res 2025;306:371-381. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2024.12.034
3. Galyfos G, Liakopoulos D, Chamzin A, Sigala F, Filis K. A systematic review and meta-analysis of
early and late outcomes after endovascular angioplasty among patients with thromboangiitis
obliterans and chronic limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg 2023;77(5):1534-1541.e2.
doi:10.1016/j.jvs.2022.09.017
Key Points
Thromboangiitis obliterans is inflammatory thrombosis of small and medium-sized
arteries and sometimes superficial veins in distal upper and lower extremities.
It occurs almost exclusively in males aged 30 to 45 years who smoke.
Claudication may occur, and patients may develop ischemic ulceration and gangrene of
one or more digits.
Diagnose clinically but exclude other causes of ischemia by testing.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/peripheral-artery-disorders/thromboangiitis-obliterans 3/4
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:49 Thromboangiitis Obliterans - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Smoking cessation is essential; prostacyclin infusion may help prevent amputation, but
evidence supporting use of other medications is limited.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/peripheral-artery-disorders/thromboangiitis-obliterans 4/4
