=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:35:48.588141",
  "file_size_bytes": 413358,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Tricuspid Regurgitation
(Tricuspid Insufficiency; Tricuspid Incompetence)
By Guy P. Armstrong, MD, Waitemata District Health Board and Waitemata Cardiology, Auckland
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Jun 2025
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) is insufficiency of the tricuspid valve causing
backflow of blood from the right ventricle to the right atrium during systole.
The most common cause is dilation of the right ventricle. Symptoms and signs
are usually absent, but severe TR can cause neck pulsations, a holosystolic
murmur, and right ventricular–induced heart failure or atrial fibrillation.
Diagnosis is by physical examination and echocardiography. TR usually benign;
however, it is increasingly implicated as a risk factor for heart failure. Selected
symptomatic patients require annuloplasty or valve repair or replacement.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Etiology of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation may be:
Primary
Secondary (> 80% of cases) (1)
Primary tricuspid regurgitation is less common. It can be due to:
Blunt chest trauma
Carcinoid syndrome
Congenital defects (eg, cleft tricuspid valve, endocardial cushion defects)
Ebstein anomaly (downward displacement of a congenitally malformed tricuspid cusp into
the right ventricle [RV])
Idiopathic myxomatous degeneration
Marfan syndrome
Medications (eg, ergotamine, fenfluramine, phentermine)
Rheumatic fever
 1/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Valvular abnormalities caused by infective endocarditis
Secondary tricuspid regurgitation is due to leaflet tethering, which is the result of reduced leaflet
coaptation caused by annular dilation (typical of right atrial dilation [atrial secondary] caused by chronic
atrial fibrillation) and/or papillary muscle displacement (most commonly as a result of left heart disease
(ventricular secondary) causing pulmonary hypertension and leading to RV dilation or geometric
distortion). Iatrogenic causes include pacemaker leads that cross the tricuspid valve and valve damage
sustained during RV endomyocardial biopsy or other right heart catheterizations (pacemaker lead
associated secondary) (see table Mechanisms of Tricuspid Regurgitation).
Long-standing severe TR may lead to RV dysfunction–induced heart failure and atrial fibrillation.
TABLE
Mechanisms of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Right
Typical Ventricular Size, Potential
Type
Mechanism Systolic Treatment*
Function
Primary
Usually
Valvular Abnormal leaflets Initially normal
replacement
Secondary
Tricuspid valve
Atrial Dilated annulus Initially normal
annuloplasty
Edge-to-edge repair
Tethered Dilated and (under
Ventricular
(restricted) leaflets impaired development) or
replacement
Lead interferes Lead extraction and
Pacemaker lead
with valve function Variable tricuspid valve
associated
or damages leaflets replacement
* Patient selection based upon patient characteristics is critical, and individualization of
therapy is necessary.
Etiology reference
1. Badano LP, Tomaselli M, Muraru D, Galloo X, Li CHP, Ajmone Marsan N. Advances in the
Assessment of Patients With Tricuspid Regurgitation: A State-of-the-Art Review on the
Echocardiographic Evaluation Before and After Tricuspid Valve Interventions. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
2024;37(11):1083-1102. doi:10.1016/j.echo.2024.07.008
 2/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Symptoms and Signs of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation usually causes no symptoms, but some patients experience neck pulsations due
to elevated jugular pressures. Symptoms of severe TR include peripheral edema, fatigue, abdominal
bloating, ascites, and anorexia. Patients may also develop symptoms of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter.
Signs of moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation include jugular venous distention, with a prominent
merged c-v wave and a steep y descent, and sometimes enlarged liver and peripheral edema. In severe
TR, a right jugular venous thrill may be palpable, as may systolic hepatic pulsation and an RV impulse at
the left lower sternal border.
Auscultation
Holosystolic murmur heard best at the left middle or lower sternal border (frequently not
heard)
On auscultation, the first heart sound (S1) may be normal or barely audible if a tricuspid regurgitation
murmur is present; the second heart sound (S2) may be split (with a loud pulmonic component [P2] in
pulmonary hypertension) or single because of prompt pulmonary valve closing with merger of P2 and
the aortic component (A2). An RV third heart sound (S3) may be audible near the sternum with RV
dysfunction–induced heart failure.
The murmur of tricuspid regurgitation is frequently not heard. When evident, it is a holosystolic
murmur heard best at the left middle or lower sternal border or at the epigastrium with the bell of
the stethoscope when the patient is sitting upright or standing. The murmur may be high-pitched if TR is
trivial and due to pulmonary hypertension, or it may be medium-pitched if TR is severe and has other
causes. The murmur varies with respiration, becoming louder with inspiration (Carvallo sign).
When the murmur is not present at all, the diagnosis is best made by the appearance of the jugular
venous wave pattern and the presence of hepatic systolic pulsations.
Diagnosis of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Echocardiography
Mild TR is most often detected on echocardiography performed for other reasons. Less than mild
("trivial" or "physiological") TR is a normal finding.
More moderate or severe TR may be suggested by history and physical examination. Confirmation is by
echocardiography.
Severe TR is characterized echocardiographically by ≥ 1 of the following (1):
Two-dimensional failure of coaptation or flail leaflet
Dense, triangular, early peaking, continuous wave Doppler of TR jet
Large flow convergence zone proximal to the valve
 3/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Large regurgitant jet on color Doppler (≥ 50% of right atrial area)
Systolic flow reversal in the hepatic veins (specific for severe TR)
Vena contracta width > 7 mm
The vena contracta is the narrowest diameter of the fluid stream downstream of an abnormal valve
orifice; it is slightly smaller than the anatomic valve orifice.
When TR is moderate or severe, the peak regurgitant velocity will underestimate pulmonary pressure.
Two-dimensional echocardiography detects the structural abnormalities present in primary TR.
Assessing RV systolic function is challenging; in adults, RV dysfunction is suggested on echocardiography
by tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) < 16 mm or tricuspid annular systolic velocity < 10
cm/second.
Cardiac MRI is the preferred method for evaluating RV size and function.
An ECG and chest radiograph are often performed.
ECG is usually normal but may show tall peaked P waves caused by right atrial enlargement, a tall R or
QR wave in V1 characteristic of RV hypertrophy, or atrial fibrillation.
Chest radiograph is usually normal but, in advanced cases with RV hypertrophy or RV dysfunction–
induced HF, may show an enlarged superior vena cava, an enlarged right atrial or RV silhouette (behind
the upper sternum in the lateral projection), or pleural effusion.
Laboratory testing is not needed, but if performed, may show hepatic dysfunction in patients with
severe TR.
Cardiac catheterization is indicated for accurate measurement of pulmonary pressure when TR is severe
and to evaluate coronary anatomy when surgery is planned. Catheterization findings include a
prominent right atrial c-v pressure wave during ventricular systole.
 4/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Phonocardiographic Characteristics of Heart Murmurs
Diagnosis reference
1. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Valvular Heart Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in
Circulation. 2021 Feb 2;143(5):e229. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000955.] [published correction
appears in Circulation. 2023 Aug 22;148(8):e8. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001177.] [published
correction appears in Circulation. 2023 Nov 14;148(20):e185. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001190.]
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2024 Sep 17;150(12):e267. doi:
10.1161/CIR.0000000000001284.]. Circulation. 2021;143(5):e72-e227.
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923
 5/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Treatment of cause
Sometimes annuloplasty or valve repair or replacement
Very mild tricuspid regurgitation is a normal finding and requires no action. Medical treatment of causes
(eg, heart failure, endocarditis) is indicated.
Medical therapy with loop diuretics can relieve congestion. Aldosterone antagonists may be of additive
benefit as they counter secondary hyperaldosteronism due to hepatic congestion. Treating the etiology
is important in secondary TR, potentially including antiarrhythmics, heart failure medications, and
pulmonary hypertension therapy.
Timing of intervention for tricuspid regurgitation depends on the patient's symptoms and RV
function (1). Patients with severe tricuspid regurgitation should undergo operation as soon as
symptoms are present despite medical treatment or when there is moderate, progressive RV
enlargement or dysfunction. Severe LV dysfunction or severe pulmonary hypertension may make the
surgical risk prohibitive.
During surgery for left-sided heart lesions, patients with moderate or mild TR with dilated annulus > 40
mm can undergo tricuspid annuloplasty, slowing progression to severe TR. However, tricuspid
annuloplasty increases risk of the need for permanent pacing five-fold (2).
Surgical options include:
Annuloplasty
Valve repair
Valve replacement
Annuloplasty, in which the tricuspid valve annulus is sutured to a prosthetic ring or a tailored reduction
in annulus circumferential size is performed, is indicated when TR is due to annular dilation.
Valve repair or replacement is indicated when TR is due to primary valve abnormalities or when
annuloplasty is not technically feasible. (See table Mechanisms of Tricuspid Regurgitation.)
Tricuspid valve repair is generally preferred to replacement. Specialized techniques, such as a cone
reconstruction, which is performed in patients with Ebstein anomaly, are used in congenital heart
disease.
Tricuspid valve replacement may be indicated when TR is due to carcinoid syndrome or Ebstein
anomaly. A bioprosthetic valve is used to reduce the risk of thromboembolism associated with the low
pressures of the right heart; in the right heart, unlike the left heart, bioprosthetic tricuspid valves can
last > 10 years (3, 4). A bioprosthetic valve requires temporary anticoagulation (see also Anticoagulation
for patients with a prosthetic cardiac valve or native valve diseases).
Progress is being made toward a percutaneous valve repair procedure. Early studies have shown
improvement in the degree of regurgitation and in right-sided hemodynamics (5). Development of a
 6/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
percutaneous repair procedure will allow lower risk repair much earlier in the natural history of severe
TR (6).
Treatment references
1. Dreyfus J, Juarez-Casso F, Sala A, et al: Benefit of isolated surgical valve repair or replacement for
functional tricuspid regurgitation and long-term outcomes stratified by the TRI-SCORE. Eur Heart J.
45(42):4512–4522, 2024. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehae578
2. Gammie JS, Chu MWA, Falk V, et al: Concomitant tricuspid repair in patients with degenerative
mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med 386(4):327–339, 2022. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2115961
3. Anselmi A, Ruggieri VG, Harmouche M, et al: Appraisal of Long-Term Outcomes of Tricuspid
Valve Replacement in the Current Perspective. Ann Thorac Surg 101(3):863–871, 2016.
doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.09.081
4. Burri M, Vogt MO, Hörer J, et al: Durability of bioprostheses for the tricuspid valve in patients
with congenital heart disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 50(5):988–993, 2016.
doi:10.1093/ejcts/ezw094
5. Dreyfus J, Galloo X, Taramasso M, et al: TRI-SCORE and benefit of intervention in patients with
severe tricuspid regurgitation. Eur Heart J 45(8):586–597, 2024. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehad585
6. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al: 2021 ESC/EACTS Guidelines for the management of
valvular heart disease [published correction appears in Eur Heart J 2022 Jun 1;43(21):2022. doi:
10.1093/eurheartj/ehac051]. Eur Heart J 43(7):561–632, 2022. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab395
Prognosis for Tricuspid Regurgitation
Severe tricuspid regurgitation ultimately has a poor prognosis, even if it is initially well-tolerated for
years. Less severe TR also affects prognosis, though no study has conclusively shown that early
intervention reduces mortality.
As with left-sided valvular regurgitation, the volume-overloaded ventricle eventually decompensates
irreversibly. However, in contrast to left-sided valvular regurgitation, there is no robust way to discern
when the RV is starting to decompensate. Given this, patients are commonly referred late for surgery. In
the context of the significant risks of surgery, the overall outcome is poor.
Key Points
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) usually occurs in a normal valve affected by right ventricular
dilation; less often there is an intrinsic valve disorder (eg, due to infective endocarditis,
carcinoid syndrome, certain medications).
Jugular venous distention may occur; severe TR may cause abdominal distension,
hepatic enlargement, and peripheral edema.
Heart sounds include a holosystolic murmur heard best at the left middle or lower
sternal border or at the epigastrium when the patient is sitting upright or standing; the
 7/8

 Tricuspid Regurgitation - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
murmur becomes louder with inspiration.
TR is usually well tolerated, but severe cases may require annuloplasty, valve repair, or
valve replacement.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 8/8
