=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:30.673645",
  "file_size_bytes": 395832,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Unstable Angina
(Acute Coronary Insufficiency; Preinfarction Angina; Intermediate Syndrome)
By Ranya N. Sweis, MD, MS, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine;
Arif Jivan, MD, PhD, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Feb 2024 | Modified Jun 2024
Unstable angina results from acute obstruction of a coronary artery without
myocardial infarction. Symptoms include chest discomfort with or without
dyspnea, nausea, and diaphoresis. Diagnosis is by electrocardiography (ECG)
and the presence or absence of biomarkers. Treatment is with antiplatelets,
anticoagulants, nitrates, statins, and beta-blockers. Coronary angiography with
percutaneous intervention or coronary artery bypass surgery is often
necessary.
(See also Overview of Acute Coronary Syndromes.)
Unstable angina is a type of acute coronary syndrome that is defined as one or more of the following in
patients whose cardiac biomarker levels do not meet criteria for acute myocardial infarction (MI):
Rest angina that is prolonged (usually > 20 minutes)
New-onset angina of at least class 3 severity in the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS)
classification (see table Canadian Cardiovascular Society Classification System for Angina
Pectoris)
Increasing angina, ie, previously diagnosed angina that has become distinctly more
frequent, more severe, longer in duration, or lower in threshold (eg, increased by ≥ 1 CCS
class or to at least CCS class 3)
Unstable angina is clinically unstable and often a prelude to myocardial infarction or arrhythmias or,
less commonly, to sudden death.
Symptoms and Signs of Unstable Angina
Patients have symptoms of angina pectoris (typically chest pain or discomfort) except that the pain or
discomfort of unstable angina usually is more intense, lasts longer, is precipitated by less exertion,
occurs spontaneously at rest, is progressive (crescendo) in nature, or involves any combination of these
features.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 1/8
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Unstable angina is classified based on severity and clinical situation (see table Canadian Cardiovascular
Classification System for Angina Pectoris). Also considered are whether unstable angina occurs during
treatment for chronic stable angina and whether transient changes in ST-T waves occur during angina. If
angina has occurred within 48 hours and no contributory extracardiac condition is present, troponin
levels may be measured to help estimate prognosis; troponin-negative results indicate a better
prognosis than troponin-positive.
Diagnosis of Unstable Angina
Serial ECGs
Serial cardiac biomarkers
Immediate coronary angiography for patients with complications (eg, persistent chest pain,
hypotension, unstable arrhythmias)
Delayed angiography (24 to 48 hours) for stable patients
(See figure Approach to Unstable Angina.)
Evaluation begins with initial and serial ECG and serial measurements of cardiac biomarkers to help
distinguish between unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction (MI)—either non–ST-segment
elevation MI (NSTEMI) or ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI). This distinction is the center of the decision
pathway because fibrinolytics benefit patients with STEMI but not those with NSTEMI and unstable
angina. Also, urgent cardiac catheterization is indicated for patients with acute STEMI but not generally
for those with NSTEMI or unstable angina.
ECG
ECG is the most important test and should be done as soon as possible (eg, within 10 minutes of
presentation) ECG changes such as ST-segment depression, ST-segment elevation, or T-wave inversion
may occur during unstable angina but are transient.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
M.I. Prediction Decision TreeCalc
Cardiac biomarkers
Patients suspected of having unstable angina should have a highly sensitive assay of cardiac troponin
(hs-cTn) done on presentation and 2 to 3 hours later. If a standard Tn assay is used, measurements are
done at presentation and 6 hours later.
Creatine kinase MB fraction (CK-MB) is not elevated in unstable angina. Cardiac troponin, particularly
when measured using high-sensitivity troponin tests, may be slightly increased but does not meet the
criteria for myocardial infarction (above the 99th percentile of the upper reference limit or URL).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 2/8
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Coronary angiography
Patients with unstable angina whose symptoms have resolved typically undergo angiography within the
first 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization to detect lesions that may require treatment. Coronary
angiography most often combines diagnosis with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI—ie,
angioplasty, stent placement).
After initial evaluation and therapy, coronary angiography may be used in patients with evidence of
ongoing ischemia (ECG findings or symptoms), hemodynamic instability, recurrent ventricular
tachyarrhythmias, and other abnormalities that suggest recurrence of ischemic events.
Treatment of Unstable Angina
Prehospital care: Oxygen, aspirin, nitrates, and triage to an appropriate medical center
Pharmacologic therapy: Antiplatelet agents, antianginal drugs, anticoagulants, and in some
cases other medications
Angiography to assess coronary artery anatomy
Reperfusion therapy: Percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass
surgery
Post-discharge rehabilitation and chronic medical management of coronary artery disease
Prehospital care
Oxygen
Aspirin
Nitrates
Triage to appropriate medical center
A reliable IV route must be established, oxygen given (typically 2 L by nasal cannula) if patients are
hypoxemic, and continuous single-lead ECG monitoring started. Prehospital interventions by emergency
medical personnel (including ECG, chewed aspirin [160 to 325 mg], pain management with nitrates) can
reduce risk of mortality and complications (1). Early diagnostic data and response to treatment can help
determine the need for and timing of revascularization.
Hospital admission
Risk-stratify patient and choose timing of reperfusion strategy
Pharmacologic therapy with antiplatelets, anticoagulants, and other medications based on
reperfusion strategy
On arrival to the emergency department, the patient's diagnosis is confirmed. Pharmacologic therapy
and timing of revascularization depend on the clinical picture. In clinically unstable patients (patients
with ongoing symptoms, hypotension or sustained arrhythmias), urgent angiography with
revascularization is indicated. In clinically stable patients, angiography with revascularization may be
deferred for 24 to 48 hours (see figure Approach to Unstable Angina).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 3/8
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Approach to Unstable Angina
* Morphine should be used judiciously (eg, if nitroglycerin is contraindicated or if the patient
has symptoms despite nitroglycerin therapy). Data suggest that morphine attenuates activity of
some P2Y12 receptor inhibitors and may contribute to worse patient outcomes.
† Complicated means that the hospital course was complicated by recurrent angina or
infarction, heart failure, or sustained recurrent ventricular arrhythmias. Absence of any of these
events is termed uncomplicated.
‡ CABG is still generally preferred to PCI for patients with the following:
Left main or left main equivalent disease
Left ventricular dysfunction
Diabetes
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 4/8
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Also, lesions that are long or near bifurcation points are often not amenable to PCI.
CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; GP = glycoprotein; NSTEMI = non–ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction; PCI = percutaneous coronary intervention; STEMI = ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction.
Pharmacologic treatment of unstable angina
All patients should be given antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, and if chest pain is present, antianginals.
The specific medications used depend on the reperfusion strategy and other factors; their selection and
use is discussed in Medications for Acute Coronary Syndrome. Other medications, such as beta-
blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and statins, should be initiated during
admission (see table Medications for Coronary Artery Disease).
Patients with unstable angina should be given the following (unless contraindicated)
Antiplatelet agents: Aspirin, clopidogrel, or both (prasugrel or ticagrelor are alternatives to
clopidogrel)
Anticoagulants: A heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin) or bivalirudin
Sometimes a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor when PCI is done
Antianginal therapy, usually nitroglycerin
Beta-blocker
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
Statin
All patients are given aspirin 160 to 325 mg (not enteric-coated), if not contraindicated, at presentation
and 81 mg once a day indefinitely thereafter. Chewing the first dose before swallowing quickens
absorption. Aspirin reduces short- and long-term mortality risk (2). In patients undergoing PCI, a loading
dose of clopidogrel (300 to 600 mg orally once), prasugrel (60 mg orally once), or ticagrelor (180 mg
orally once) improves outcomes. For urgent PCI, prasugrel and ticagrelor are more rapid in onset and
may be preferred.
Either a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), unfractionated heparin, or bivalirudin is given routinely
to patients with unstable angina unless contraindicated (eg, by active bleeding). Unfractionated heparin
is more complicated to use because it requires frequent (every 6 hours) dosing adjustments to achieve
target activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). The LMWHs have better bioavailability, are given by
simple weight-based dose without monitoring aPTT and dose titration, and have lower risk of heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia. Bivalirudin is recommended for patients with a known or suspected history
of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Consider a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor during PCI for patients with high-risk lesions (eg, high thrombus
burden, no reflow). Abciximab, tirofiban, and eptifibatide appear to have equivalent efficacy, and the
choice of agent should depend on other factors (eg, cost, availability, familiarity—3).
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 5/8
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Chest pain can be treated with nitroglycerin or sometimes morphine. Nitroglycerin is preferable to
morphine, which should be used judiciously (eg, if a patient has a contraindication to nitroglycerin or is
in pain despite maximal nitroglycerin therapy). Nitroglycerin is initially given sublingually, followed by
continuous IV drip if needed. Morphine, given 2 to 4 mg IV, repeated every 15 minutes as needed, is
highly effective but can depress respiration, can reduce myocardial contractility, and is a potent venous
vasodilator. Evidence also suggests that morphine interferes with some P2Y12 receptor inhibitor
activity. A large retrospective trial also showed that morphine may increase mortality in patients with
acute myocardial infarction (4, 5). Hypotension and bradycardia may also occur secondary to morphine
use, but these complications can usually be overcome by prompt elevation of the lower extremities.
Standard therapy for all patients with unstable angina includes beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and
statins. Beta-blockers are recommended unless contraindicated (eg, by bradycardia, heart block,
hypotension, or asthma), especially for high-risk patients. Beta-blockers reduce heart rate, arterial
pressure, and contractility, thereby reducing cardiac workload and oxygen demand. ACE inhibitors may
provide long-term cardioprotection by improving endothelial function. If an ACE inhibitor is not
tolerated because of cough or rash (but not angioedema or renal dysfunction), an angiotensin II
receptor blocker may be substituted. Statins are also standard therapy regardless of lipid levels and
should be continued indefinitely.
Reperfusion therapy in unstable angina
Fibrinolytic drugs, which can be helpful in patients with STEMI, do not benefit patients with unstable
angina.
Angiography is typically done during admission—within 24 to 48 hours of admission if the patient is
stable or immediately in unstable patients (eg, with ongoing symptoms, hypotension, sustained
arrhythmias). Angiographic findings help determine whether PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) is indicated. Choice of reperfusion strategy is further discussed in Revascularization for Acute
Coronary Syndromes.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Although fibrinolytic drugs can help patients with STEMI, they are not beneficial in
unstable angina.
Rehabilitation and post-discharge treatment
Functional evaluation
Changes in lifestyle: Regular exercise, diet modification, weight loss, smoking cessation
Medications: Continuation of antiplatelets, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and statins
Patients who did not have coronary angiography during admission, have no high-risk features (eg, heart
failure, recurrent angina, ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation after 24 hours, mechanical
complications such as new murmurs, shock), and have an ejection fraction > 40% usually should have
stress testing of some sort before or shortly after discharge.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 6/8
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
The acute illness and treatment of unstable angina should be used to strongly motivate the patient to
modify risk factors. Evaluating the patient’s physical and emotional status and discussing them with the
patient, advising about lifestyle (eg, smoking, diet, work and play habits, exercise), and aggressively
managing risk factors may improve prognosis.
On discharge, all patients should be continued on appropriate antiplatelets, statins, antianginals, and
other medications based on comorbidities.
Treatment references
1. Nakayama N, Yamamoto T, Kikuchi M, et al: Prehospital Administration of Aspirin and
Nitroglycerin for Patients With Suspected Acute Coronary Syndrome—A Systematic Review. Circ
Rep 4(10):449–457, 2022. doi:10.1253/circrep.CR-22-0060
2. Antithrombotic Trialists' Collaboration: Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of
antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients
[published correction appears in BMJ 2002 Jan 19;324(7330):141]. BMJ 324(7329):71–86, 2002.
doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7329.71
3. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al: 2014 AHA/ACC Guideline for the Management of
Patients With Non–ST-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol 64 (24):e139–e228,
2014. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.09.017
4. Kubica J, Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al: Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure
and action in patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J 37(3):245–252, 2016. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv547
5. Meine TJ, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al: Association of intravenous morphine use and outcomes in
acute coronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE Quality Improvement Initiative. Am Heart J
149(6):1043-1049, 2005. doi 10.1016/j.ahj.2005.02.010
Prognosis for Unstable Angina
Prognosis after an episode of unstable angina depends upon how many coronary arteries are diseased,
which arteries are affected, and how severely they are affected. For example, stenosis of the proximal
left main artery or equivalent (proximal left arterial descending and circumflex artery stenosis) has a
worse prognosis than does distal stenosis or stenosis in a smaller arterial branch. Left ventricular
function also greatly influences prognosis; the presence of significant left ventricular dysfunction (even
with 1- or 2-vessel disease) warrants a lower threshold for revascularization.
Overall, a substantial proportion of patients with unstable angina have a myocardial infarction within 3
months of onset; sudden death is less common (see table Risk of Adverse Events at 14 Days in Unstable
Angina or NSTEMI). Marked ECG changes with chest pain indicate higher risk of subsequent MI or death.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Unstable Angina Outcome Prediction
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 7/8
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 14:43 Unstable Angina - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Unstable angina is new, worsening, or rest angina in patients whose cardiac biomarkers
do not meet criteria for myocardial infarction.
Symptoms of unstable angina include new or worsening chest pain or chest pain
occurring at rest.
Diagnosis is based on serial ECGs and cardiac biomarkers.
Immediate treatment includes oxygen, antianginals, antiplatelets, and anticoagulants.
For patients with ongoing symptoms, hypotension, or sustained arrhythmias, do
immediate angiography.
For stable patients, do angiography within 24 to 48 hours of hospitalization.
Following recovery, initiate or continue antiplatelet agents, beta-blockers, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors, and statins.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/cardiovascular-disorders/coronary-artery-disease/unstable-angina 8/8
