=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Varicose Veins - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:58.114190",
  "file_size_bytes": 555424,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Varicose Veins - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Varicose Veins - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Varicose Veins
By James D. Douketis, MD, McMaster University
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Dec 2023
Varicose veins are dilated superficial veins in the lower extremities. Usually, no
cause is obvious. Varicose veins are typically asymptomatic but may cause a
sense of fullness, pressure, and pain or hyperesthesia in the legs. Diagnosis is
by physical examination. Treatment may include compression, wound care,
sclerotherapy, and surgery.
Varicose veins may occur alone or with chronic venous insufficiency, and also can develop after deep
venous thrombosis.
Etiology of Varicose Veins
Etiology is usually unknown, but varicose veins may result from primary venous valvular insufficiency
with reflux or from primary dilation of the vein wall due to structural weakness. In some people,
varicose veins result from chronic venous insufficiency and venous hypertension.
Most people have no obvious risk factors. Varicose veins are common within families, suggesting a
genetic component. Varicose veins are more common among women because estrogen affects venous
structure, pregnancy increases pelvic and leg venous pressures, or both.
Rarely, varicose veins are part of Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber syndrome, which includes congenital
arteriovenous fistulas and diffuse cutaneous capillary angiomas.
Symptoms and Signs of Varicose Veins
Varicose veins may initially be tense and palpable but are not necessarily visible. Later, they may
progressively enlarge, protrude, and become obvious; they can cause a sense of fullness, fatigue,
pressure, and superficial pain or hyperesthesia in the legs. Varicose veins are most visible when the
patient stands.
For unclear reasons, stasis dermatitis and venous stasis ulcers are uncommon. When skin changes (eg,
induration, pigmentation, eczema) occur, they typically affect the medial malleolar region. Ulcers may
 1/3

 Varicose Veins - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
develop after minimal trauma to an affected area. Ulcers are usually small, superficial, and painful.
Varicose Veins
IMAGE
ST BARTHOLOMEW HOSPITAL/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY
Varicose veins occasionally thrombose, causing pain. Superficial varicose veins may cause thin venous
bullae in the skin, which may rupture and bleed after minimal trauma. Very rarely, such bleeding, if
undetected during sleep, is fatal.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Varicose veins rarely lead to stasis dermatitis or stasis ulcers, but ulceration may develop
following minor injury to an affected area.
Diagnosis of Varicose Veins
Clinical evaluation
Sometimes Doppler ultrasonography
Diagnosis is usually obvious from the physical examination. Trendelenburg test (comparing venous
filling before and after release of a thigh tourniquet) is no longer commonly used to identify retrograde
blood flow past incompetent saphenous valves.
Duplex ultrasonography is an accurate test, but it is not clear whether it is routinely necessary.
Treatment of Varicose Veins
 2/3

 Varicose Veins - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Compression stockings
Sometimes minimally invasive therapy (eg, sclerotherapy, thermal ablation) or surgery
Treatment aims to relieve symptoms, improve the leg’s appearance, and, in some cases, prevent
complications of varicose veins.
Treatment includes compression stockings and local wound care as needed.
Minimally invasive therapy (eg, sclerotherapy) and surgery are indicated for prevention of recurrent
variceal thrombosis and for skin changes; these procedures are also commonly used for cosmetic
reasons.
Sclerotherapy uses an irritant (eg, sodium tetradecyl sulfate) to induce a thrombophlebitic reaction that
fibroses and occludes the vein; however, many varicose veins recannulate.
Surgery involves ligation or stripping of the long and sometimes the short saphenous veins. These
procedures provide good short-term symptom relief, but long-term efficacy is poor (ie, patients often
develop recurrent varicose veins).
Thermal ablation with the use of laser or radiofrequency ablation is another minimally invasive tool for
the treatment of varicose veins.
Regardless of treatment, new varicose veins develop, and treatment often must be repeated
indefinitely.
Key Points
Varicose veins are more common in women than in men.
Symptoms may include fullness, fatigue, pressure, bleeding and pain or hyperesthesia in
the legs; stasis dermatitis and venous stasis ulcers are uncommon.
Treatment may include compression stockings, sclerotherapy, minimally invasive
surgery, or thermal ablation
Regardless of treatment, varicose veins often recur.
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 3/3
