=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:20.580294",
  "file_size_bytes": 601975,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Ventricular Tachycardia (VT)
By L. Brent Mitchell, MD, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, University of Calgary
Reviewed By Jonathan G. Howlett, MD, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary
Reviewed/Revised Sept 2024
Ventricular tachycardia is ≥ 3 consecutive ventricular beats at a rate ≥ 120
beats/minute. Symptoms depend on duration and vary from none to
palpitations to hemodynamic collapse and death. Diagnosis is by
electrocardiography. Treatment of more than brief episodes is with
cardioversion or antiarrhythmics, depending on symptoms. If necessary, long-
term treatment is with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator.
(See also Overview of Arrhythmias.)
Some experts use a cutoff rate of ≥ 100 beats/minute for ventricular tachycardia (VT). Repetitive
ventricular rhythms at slower rates are called accelerated idioventricular rhythms or slow VT; they are
usually benign and are not treated unless patients have hemodynamic symptoms.
Most patients with VT have a significant heart disorder, particularly prior myocardial infarction or a
cardiomyopathy. Electrolyte abnormalities (particularly hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia), acidemia,
hypoxemia, and adverse medication effects contribute (1). The long QT syndrome (congenital or
acquired) is associated with a particular form of VT, torsades de pointes.
Ventricular tachycardia may be monomorphic or polymorphic and nonsustained or sustained.
Monomorphic VT: Single abnormal focus or reentrant pathway and thus regular, identical-
appearing QRS complexes
Polymorphic VT: Several different foci or pathways and thus irregular, varying QRS
complexes
Nonsustained VT: Lasts < 30 seconds
Sustained VT: Lasts ≥ 30 seconds or is terminated sooner because of hemodynamic collapse
Right and left ventricular outflow tract ventricular tachycardia (RVOT-VT and LVOT-VT) are idiopathic
ventricular tachycardias that occur in the absence of an evident underlying structural heart disorder (2).
They are due to cAMP-mediated delayed after-depolarizations and usually occur with exercise or
emotional stress (2). They typically have a morphology that is similar to left bundle branch block (LBBB)
 1/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
and a vertical downward axis (positive QRS in lead V1, negative QRS in lead AVL, and near-isoelectric
QRS in lead I) (see Ventricular Premature Beats).
Verapamil-sensitive left fascicular VT (Belhassen VT, left septal VT) is an idiopathic ventricular
tachycardia that occurs in the absence of an evident underlying structural heart disorder (3). It is due to
a slow conduction section of abnormal Purkinje tissue that can support macro-reentry using ventricular
myocardium and part of the left (usually posterior) hemifascicle of the left bundle branch. It is typically
induced by a critical heart rate either spontaneously or by rapid atrial pacing and usually has a
morphology similar to that of right bundle branch block with left axis deviation (3).
Bundle branch reentry VT is a ventricular tachycardia that occurs in patients with advanced
cardiomyopathy or isolated conduction system disease (3). It is due to macro-reentry using the bundle
branches, usually the antegrade limb is the right bundle branch and the retrograde limb is the left
bundle branch. Accordingly, this ventricular tachycardia usually has a LBBB-like QRS morphology (3).
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is a genetic disorder affecting intracellular
calcium regulation in cardiac tissue. Patients are predisposed to atrial and/or ventricular
tachyarrhythmias and sudden cardiac death, particularly during increased adrenergic activity. (See also
Arrhythmogenic Cardiac Disorders.)
VT frequently deteriorates to ventricular fibrillation and thus cardiac arrest.
General references
1. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al: 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management
of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of
the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 72:e91–e220, 2018. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2017.10.054
2. Lerman BB: Mechanism, diagnosis, and treatment of outflow tract tachycardia. Nat Rev Cardiol
12(10):597–608, 2015. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2015.121
3. Sung RK, Boyden PA, Scheinman M: Cellular Physiology and Clinical Manifestations of Fascicular
Arrhythmias in Normal Hearts. JACC Clin Electrophysiol 3(12):1343–1355, 2017. doi:
10.1016/j.jacep.2017.07.011
Symptoms and Signs of Ventricular Tachycardia
Ventricular tachycardia of short duration or slow rate may be asymptomatic. Sustained VT is almost
always symptomatic, causing palpitations, symptoms of hemodynamic compromise, or sudden cardiac
death.
Diagnosis of Ventricular Tachycardia
Electrocardiography (ECG)
 2/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia is by ECG (see figure Broad QRS Ventricular Tachycardia). Any wide
QRS complex tachycardia (QRS ≥ 0.12 second) should be considered VT until proved otherwise.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Any wide QRS complex tachycardia (QRS ≥ 0.12 second) should be considered VT until
proved otherwise.
Diagnosis is supported by ECG findings of
Dissociated P-wave activity
Fusion beats (a conducted sinus beat fusing with a ventricular beat creating a QRS complex
with morphology, duration, and axis in-between those of normally conducted beats and
those of the wide QRS complex ventricular beats)
Capture beats (normally conducted sinus beat interrupting a wide-complex tachycardia)
Uniformity of QRS vectors in the V leads (concordance) with discordant T-wave vector
(opposite QRS vector)
A frontal-plane QRS axis in the northwest quadrant
Differential diagnosis includes fast supraventricular rhythms conducted with bundle branch block or via
an accessory pathway (see figure Modified Brugada Criteria for Ventricular Tachycardia) (1). Because
some patients tolerate VT surprisingly well, concluding that a well-tolerated wide QRS complex
tachycardia must be of supraventricular origin is a mistake. Using medications appropriate for
supraventricular tachycardia (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) in patients with VT may cause hemodynamic
collapse and death (2). Still, because of its very brief half-life, IV adenosine may be used as a diagnostic
maneuver (and possibly treatment, if the arrhythmia is supraventricular) in a patient who is stable and
has a regular, monomorphic wide QRS complex tachycardia (3), albeit with a small risk of converting
stable VT to unstable ventricular fibrillation.
 3/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Modified Brugada Criteria for Ventricular Tachycardia
*With RBBB QRS:
In V1, monophasic R, or QR, or RS
 4/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In V6, R/S < 1 or monophasic R or QR
*With LBBB QRS:
In V1, R > 30 milliseconds wide or RS > 60 milliseconds wide
In V6, QR or QS
AV = atrioventricular; LBBB = left bundle branch block; msec = millisecond; RBBB = right
bundle branch block; VT = ventricular tachycardia.
Data from Brugada P, Brugada J, Mont L, Smeets J, Andries EW. A new approach to the
differential diagnosis of a regular tachycardia with a wide QRS complex. Circulation.
1991;83(5):1649-1659. doi:10.1161/01.cir.83.5.1649
Pearls & Pitfalls
Because some patients tolerate ventricular tachycardia surprisingly well, it is a mistake to
conclude that a well-tolerated wide QRS complex tachycardia must be of supraventricular
origin.
Broad QRS Ventricular Tachycardia
The QRS duration is 160 millisecond. An independent P wave can be seen in II (arrows). There
is a leftward mean frontal axis shift.
Diagnosis references
1. Vereckei A, Simon A, Szénási G, et al: The Application of a New, Modified Algorithm for the
Differentiation of Regular Ventricular and Pre-Excited Tachycardias. Heart Lung Circ 32(6):719–725,
2023. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2023.03.016
 5/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
2. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al: 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management
of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of
the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical
Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 72:e91–e220, 2018. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2017.10.054
3. Marill KA, Wolfram S, Desouza IS, et al: Adenosine for wide-complex tachycardia: efficacy and
safety. Crit Care Med 37:2512–2518, 2009. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181a93661
Treatment of Ventricular Tachycardia
Acute: Sometimes synchronized direct current cardioversion, sometimes class I or class III
antiarrhythmics
Long-term: Usually an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
Acute
Treatment of acute ventricular tachycardia depends on symptoms and duration of VT.
Pulseless VT requires defibrillation beginning with biphasic 120 to 200 joules (or monophasic 360
joules).
Stable sustained VT can be treated with synchronized direct current cardioversion with ≥100 joules
using conscious sedation or transient general anesthesia.
Stable sustained VT can be treated with intravenous class I or class III antiarrhythmics (1) (see table
Antiarrhythmic Medications). Lidocaine acts quickly but is frequently ineffective. If lidocaine is
ineffective, IV procainamide may be given, but it may take up to 1 hour to work. IV amiodarone is
frequently used but does not usually work quickly. Failure of IV procainamide or IV amiodarone is an
indication for cardioversion. Right and left ventricular outflow tract ventricular tachycardias (RVOT-VT
and LVOT-VT) respond to IV adenosine. Verapamil-sensitive left fascicular ventricular tachycardia
responds to IV verapamil (1).
Nonsustained VT does not require immediate treatment unless the runs are frequent or long enough
to cause symptoms. In such cases, antiarrhythmics are used as for sustained VT.
Long-term
The primary goal is preventing sudden death, rather than simply suppressing the arrhythmia. It is best
accomplished by use of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). However, the decision about
whom to treat is complex and depends on the estimated probability of life-threatening VTs and the
severity of underlying heart disorders (1) (see table Indications for Implantable Cardioverter-
Defibrillators).
Long-term treatment is not required when the index episode of ventricular tachycardia resulted from a
transient cause (eg, during the 48 hours after onset of myocardial infarction) or a reversible cause (acid-
base disturbances, electrolyte abnormalities, proarrhythmic medication effect).
 6/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
In the absence of a transient or reversible cause, patients who have had an episode of sustained VT
typically require an ICD (1). Most patients with sustained VT and a significant structural heart disorder
should also receive a beta-blocker. If an ICD cannot be used, amiodarone may be the preferred
antiarrhythmic for prevention of sudden death.
Because nonsustained VT is a marker for increased risk of sudden death in patients with a structural
heart disorder, such patients (particularly those with an ejection fraction < 0.35) require further
evaluation. Such patients should receive an ICD.
When prevention of VT is important (usually in patients who have an ICD and are having frequent
episodes of VT), antiarrhythmics or transcatheter or surgical ablation of the arrhythmogenic substrate is
required (1). Any class Ia, Ib, Ic, II, or III antiarrhythmic can be used. Because beta-blockers (class II) are
safe, they are the first choice unless contraindicated. If an additional medication is required, sotalol is
commonly used, then amiodarone (1).
Transcatheter ablation is particularly successful in patients who have VT with well-defined syndromes
(eg, right or left ventricular outflow tract VT, verapamil-sensitive left fascicular VT, or bundle branch
reentrant VT (1).
Overview of Ventricular Tachyc...
VIDEO
Treatment reference
1. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al: 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for
management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death:
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force
on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol 72:e91–e220, 2018.
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.10.054
 7/8

 Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) - Cardiovascular Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Key Points
Any wide-complex (QRS ≥ 0.12 second) tachycardia should be considered ventricular
tachycardia (VT) until proved otherwise.
Patients who do not have a pulse should be cardioverted.
Synchronized cardioversion or antiarrhythmic medications may be tried if the patient is
stable.
Patients who had an episode of sustained VT without a transient or reversible cause
typically require an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).
Drugs Mentioned In This Article
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
 8/8
