Ventricular Fibrillation (VF)
Ventricular fibrillation causes uncoordinated quivering of the ventricle with no
useful contractions. It causes immediate syncope and death within minutes.
Treatment is with cardiopulmonary resuscitation, including immediate
defibrillation.
Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is due to multiple wavelet reentrant electrical activity and is manifested on
electrocardiogram (ECG) by ultrarapid baseline undulations that are irregular in timing and morphology.
Although early reports noted that VF was the presenting rhythm for about 75% of patients in cardiac
arrest (1), the proportion of cardiac arrests due to VF has been decreasing. More recently, VF has been
reported to be the presenting rhythm in about 40% of cardiac arrests (2). Nevertheless, because VF
leads to asystole with time, this proportion is an underestimate. Accordingly, VF is still the terminal
event in many disorders. Overall, most patients with VF have an underlying heart disorder (typically
ischemic cardiomyopathy, but also hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or dilated cardiomyopathy, or other
arrhythmogenic cardiovascular disorders). Patients in whom no underlying disorder is detected are
considered to have idiopathic VF. Risk of VF in any disorder is increased by electrolyte abnormalities,
acidosis, hypoxemia, or ischemia.
Ventricular fibrillation is much less common among infants and children, in whom asystole is the more
common presentation of cardiac arrest.
Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
Patients who have been resuscitated from VF cardiac arrest are evaluated for cardiac disease,
particularly coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathies, and channelopathies (3). If comprehensive
electrocardiographic, imaging, and provocative testing do not identify any such causative disorder, the
patient is considered to have idiopathic ventricular fibrillation. It is thought that some of these patients
likely have an unrecognized or unknown genetic disorder. Because of the possibility that the disorder is
familial, it is recommended that family members undergo close surveillance for possible cardiac events
(eg, syncope, palpitations) and, should any occur, undergo testing, including ECG, exercise stress testing,
and echocardiography. Genetic testing of survivors and cascade genetic testing of family members is
done in selected patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy or a suspected channelopathy (3) (see also
Arrhythmogenic Cardiac Disorders). Treatment is an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (3).
Treatment of Ventricular Fibrillation
Defibrillation
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator
Treatment of ventricular fibrillation is with cardiopulmonary resuscitation, including defibrillation,
beginning with biphasic 120 to 200 joules (or monophasic 360 joules). The success rate for immediate
defibrillation (within seconds as can be achieved by an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator) is about
99% provided that overwhelming pump failure does not preexist. Thereafter, the first shock
defibrillation success rate decreases by about 10% per minute (1).
Patients who have VF without a reversible or transient cause are at high risk of future VF events and of
sudden death. Most of these patients require an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; many require
concomitant antiarrhythmic medications to reduce the frequency of subsequent episodes of ventricular
tachycardia and VF (2).