=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:36:49.093692",
  "file_size_bytes": 482824,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Handbooks",
  "source_folder": "Handbooks",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Handbooks/Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
MERCK MANUAL
Professional Version
Weakness
By Mark Freedman, MD, MSc, University of Ottawa
Reviewed By Michael C. Levin, MD, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan
Reviewed/Revised Aug 2025 | Modified Dec 2025
Weakness is one of the most common reasons patients present to primary care clinicians. Weakness is
loss of muscle strength, although many patients also use the term when they feel generally fatigued or
have functional limitations (eg, due to pain or limited joint motion) even though muscle strength is
normal.
Weakness may affect a few or many muscles and develop suddenly or gradually. Other symptoms may
be present depending on the cause. Weakness of specific muscle groups can cause disorders of eye
movement, dysarthria, dysphagia, or respiratory compromise.
Pathophysiology of Weakness
Voluntary movement is initiated in the cerebral motor cortex, at the posterior aspect of the frontal lobe.
The neurons involved (upper motor or corticospinal tract neurons) synapse with neurons in the spinal
cord (lower motor neurons). Lower motor neurons transmit impulses to the neuromuscular junction to
initiate muscle contraction.
Common mechanisms of weakness thus include dysfunction of:
Upper motor neurons (corticospinal and corticobulbar tract lesions)
Lower motor neurons (eg, due to peripheral polyneuropathies or anterior horn cell lesions)
Neuromuscular junction
Muscle (eg, due to myopathies)
The location of certain lesions correlates with physical findings:
Upper motor neuron dysfunction disinhibits lower motor neurons, resulting in increased
muscle tone (spasticity) and increased muscle stretch reflexes (hyperreflexia). An extensor
plantar (Babinski) reflex is specific for corticospinal tract dysfunction. However, upper
motor neuron dysfunction can decrease tone and reflexes if motor paralysis is sudden and
severe (eg, in spinal cord transection, in which tone first decreases, then increases gradually
over days to weeks) or if the lesion damages the motor cortex of the precentral gyrus and
not nearby motor association areas. The distribution of weakness tends to follow upper
motor neuron distribution, primarily affecting the extensors of the upper extremities and
flexors of the lower extremities.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 1/19
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Lower motor neuron dysfunction disrupts reflex arcs, causing hyporeflexia and
decreased muscle tone (flaccidity), and may cause fasciculations; with time, muscles
atrophy.
Peripheral polyneuropathies tend to primarily affect the longest nerves (ie, weakness is
more prominent in the distal than the proximal limb and is more prominent in legs than
arms) and produce signs of lower motor neuron dysfunction (eg, decreased reflexes and
muscle tone).
The most common disorder of the neuromuscular junction—myasthenia gravis—
typically causes fluctuating weakness that worsens with activity and lessens with rest.
Diffuse muscle dysfunction (eg, in myopathies) tends to be most noticeable in the largest
muscle groups (proximal muscles).
Etiology of Weakness
The many causes of muscle weakness are categorized by location of the lesion (see table Some Causes
of Muscle Weakness). Lesions in a given location usually manifest with similar clinical findings. However,
some disorders have characteristics of lesions in more than one location. For example, patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) may have findings of both upper and lower motor neuron
dysfunction. Disorders of the spinal cord may affect tracts from upper motor neurons, lower motor
neurons (anterior horn cells), or both.
Common causes of focal weakness include:
Stroke (the most common cause of unilateral weakness)
Neuropathies, including those caused by trauma or entrapment (eg, carpal tunnel
syndrome) and those that are immune-mediated (eg, Bell palsy)
Spinal root entrapment (eg, herniated intervertebral disk)
Spinal cord compression (eg, cervical spondylosis, epidural cancer metastasis, trauma)
Multiple sclerosis
Temporary focal weakness may be due to postictal (Todd) paralysis, which usually resolves over
several hours, or result from a transient ischemic attack (TIA). A rare cause of temporary weakness is
periodic paralysis, often caused by changes in potassium concentrations.
The most common causes of generalized weakness are:
Deconditioning due to inactivity (disuse atrophy) resulting from illness or frailty, especially
in older patients
Generalized muscle wasting due to prolonged immobilization in an intensive care unit (ICU)
—a condition called critical illness myopathy
Critical illness polyneuropathy (ICU neuropathy)
Common myopathies (eg, alcohol myopathy, hypokalemia, glucocorticoid-induced
myopathy)
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 2/19
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
TABLE
Some Causes of Muscle Weakness
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*,†
Brain upper motor neuron lesions
Increased muscle tone, Brain imaging with CT or
hyperreflexia, extensor MRI
Brain tumors
plantar (Babinski) reflex
For multiple sclerosis:
Multiple sclerosis
Possibly more stiffness MRI of the brain and the
and loss of fine motor cervical and thoracic spinal
Stroke
control (finger dexterity) cord (not CT); sometimes
than weakness (hand grip) lumbar puncture
Myelopathies (involving upper or lower motor neuron dysfunction or both)
Autoimmune disorders
(eg, multiple sclerosis,
neuromyelitis optica,
myelin-oligodendrocyte Spinal cord MRI, CT
Dysfunction of upper
associated disorder myelography, or both
motor neurons, lower
(MOGAD), vasculitis)
Somatosensory evoked
motor neurons, or both
Cauda equina syndrome potentials
Commonly erectile
Copper deficiency Other tests as needed to
dysfunction, bowel and
help identify the cause:
Infections (eg, HTLV-1, HIV bladder incontinence or
Possibly including CSF
retention, absence of
infection, syphilis, human
analysis (eg, protein, VDRL,
sphincter reflexes (eg, anal
herpes simplex 6, EBV
IgG index, oligoclonal
wink, bulbocavernosus)
infection, varicella-zoster)
banding, viral titers, PCR),
Progressive limb weakness
Spinal cord compression vitamin B12 level, HIV test,
and fatigability,
(eg, due to spondylosis, ANA, RPR, MOG-IgG
clumsiness, spasticity (legs
epidural tumor, autoantibody and NMO-
first, then arms with
hematoma, or abscess) IgG autoantibody (anti–
gradual spinal cord
aquaporin-4 antibody) for
Spinal cord ischemia or
compression)
neuromyelitis optica,
infarction
HTLV-1 or VDRL, genetic
Classically dermatomal
Spinocerebellar ataxias sensory level testing, serum copper and
ceruloplasmin
Subacute combined
degeneration
Transverse myelitis
Motor neuron disorders (upper, lower, or both)
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 3/19
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*,†
Progressive weakness and Electromyography and
Amyotrophic lateral
fatigability, clumsiness, brain and spinal cord MRI,
sclerosis
spasticity (upper motor CT myelography, or both
Inherited motor neuron neuron)
Other tests as needed to
diseases (eg, spinal
Hyporeflexia or flaccidity help identify the cause:
muscular or
(lower motor neuron) Possibly including 24-hour
spinocerebellar atrophies,
urine heavy metal screen
including Kennedy Muscle atrophy (lower
to exclude lead
disease) motor neuron)
neuropathy, anti-GM1
Postpoliomyelitis Fasciculations (lower antibody titers (for
syndrome motor neuron) multifocal motor
Gynecomastia, diabetes, neuropathy), and genetic
Progressive bulbar palsy
and testicular atrophy testing (eg, for Kennedy
Viral polio-like disorders
(Kennedy disease) disease)
Polyneuropathies (mostly, peripheral polyneuropathies)†,‡
Alcohol-related Hyporeflexia, sometimes Tests to confirm the
neuropathy fasciculations presence of neuropathy:
Electrodiagnostic testing
Critical illness If chronic, muscle atrophy
polyneuropathy Other tests as needed to
In peripheral
help identify the cause:
Demyelinating polyneuropathy,
Possibly including plasma
neuropathies (eg, CIDP, disproportionate
glucose, 2-hour oral
Guillain-Barré syndrome) weakness of most distal
glucose tolerance test,
muscles and often sensory
Diabetic neuropathy hemoglobin A1C, RPR, HIV
deficits in the same
test, folate, vitamin B12,
Drug-induced (stocking-glove)
serum protein
neuropathies (eg, by distribution (common
immunofixation
vincristine, cisplatin, or exceptions include CIDP,
electrophoresis, chest CT
statins) which affects proximal and
and serum ACE level (for
distal nerves and muscles
Hereditary neuropathies
sarcoidosis), 24-hour urine
equally)
heavy metals screen, anti-
Infectious neuropathies
MAG antibodies (present
(eg, diphtheria, hepatitis C,
in some demyelinating
HIV, Lyme disease,
neuropathies), anti-GM1
syphilis)
antibody titers (for
Multifocal motor
multifocal motor
neuropathy
neuropathy), and genetic
testing (for hereditary
Sarcoidosis
neuropathies)
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 4/19
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*,†
Toxic neuropathies (eg, Sometimes cerebrospinal
heavy metals) analysis
Vitamin deficiency (eg,
thiamin, vitamin B6,
vitamin B12)
Neuromuscular junction disorders
Weakness that fluctuates
Tests to confirm
in intensity (eg, in
mechanism:
myasthenia gravis or
Electrodiagnostic testing
Eaton-Lambert syndrome)
Botulism
Other tests as needed to
Often, prominent bulbar
Eaton-Lambert syndrome help identify the cause:
findings (eg, in myasthenia
Possibly including assays
gravis, botulism, or
Myasthenia gravis
for toxins and
organophosphate
Tick paralysis acetylcholine receptor
poisoning)
antibody and ice pack
Sometimes hyporeflexia
testing (for myasthenia
(eg, in Eaton-Lambert
gravis)
syndrome or tick paralysis)
Tearing of the eyes,
blurred vision, increased
salivation, sweating, Often history and physical
Organophosphate or coughing, vomiting, examination alone
frequent bowel
carbamate poisoning
Sometimes blood tests to
movements and urination,
identify the toxin
and fasciculations
Sometimes hyporeflexia
Myopathies
Alcohol myopathy Disproportionate Tests to confirm
weakness of proximal mechanism:
Channelopathies
muscles (equally) Electrodiagnostic testing,
Corticosteroid myopathy muscle enzymes (eg, CK,
If chronic, muscle wasting
aldolase), and sometimes
Cushing syndrome
With some types, muscle MRI to confirm muscle
Hereditary muscle tenderness atrophy, hypertrophy, or
disorders (eg, muscular
pseudohypertrophy
dystrophies)
Other testing as needed
Hypocalcemia
to help identify the
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 5/19
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach*,†
cause: Possibly including
Hypokalemia
muscle biopsy with special
Hypomagnesemia
stains and genetic testing
Hypophosphatemia for certain hereditary
disorders, serum
Hypothyroid myopathy
electrolytes (particularly
Metabolic myopathies calcium, potassium,
magnesium, and
Polymyositis or
phosphate), serum TSH,
dermatomyositis
and herpes zoster titers
Rhabdomyolysis
Statin-induced myopathy
Thyrotoxic myopathy
Viral myositis
Generalized muscle wasting due to illness and disuse
Burns
Diffuse muscle atrophy,
Cancer
normal sensation and
History and physical
reflexes, no fasciculations
Prolonged bed rest
examination alone
Clinically apparent risk
Sepsis
factors
Starvation
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 6/19
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
* Clinical examination is always done but is mentioned in this column only when that can be
the sole means of diagnosis.
† Testing may vary; additional testing may be indicated depending on which disorders are
clinically suspected.
‡ Multiple mononeuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex), if sufficiently widespread, may cause
deficits clinically similar to those of diffuse polyneuropathies.
ACE = angiotensin-converting enzyme; ANA = antinuclear antibodies; anti-GM1 = anti-
ganglioside monosialic acid; anti-MAG = antimyelin-associated glycoprotein; CIDP = chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; CK = creatine kinase; CSF = cerebral spinal
fluid; EBV = Epstein-Barr virus; HTLV = human T-lymphotropic virus; MOG = myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, NMO-IgG = neuromyelitis optica antibody; RPR = rapid
plasma reagin; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone; VDRL = Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory.
Fatigue
Many patients report weakness when their problem is fatigue. Fatigue can prevent maximal effort and
muscle performance during strength testing.
Common causes of fatigue include acute severe illness of almost any cause, cancers, chronic infections
(eg, HIV infection, hepatitis, endocarditis, mononucleosis), endocrine disorders, renal failure, hepatic
failure, heart failure, and anemia. Multiple sclerosis can cause daily fatigue that increases with exposure
to heat and humidity.
Patients with fibromyalgia, depression, or myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome may
report weakness or fatigue but have no defined objective abnormalities.
Evaluation of Weakness
Evaluation of weakness should try to distinguish true muscular weakness from fatigue, then check for
findings that help establish the location or mechanism (eg, whether weakness is caused by dysfunction
of the brain, spinal cord, plexuses, peripheral nerves, neuromuscular junction, or muscles) and, when
possible, the cause.
History
History of present illness should begin with open-ended questions, asking patients to describe in
detail what they are experiencing as weakness. Then, specific questions can be asked, particularly about
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 7/19
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
the ability to do specific tasks, including brushing teeth or hair, speaking, swallowing, rising from a chair,
climbing stairs, and walking.
Clinicians should also ask about the onset of weakness (sudden or gradual), whether it varies
throughout the day (diurnal variation as occurs in myasthenia gravis) and progression (eg, constant,
worsening, intermittent) of symptoms. Close questioning is needed to differentiate sudden onset from
sudden recognition; patients may suddenly recognize symptoms only after slowly progressive weakness
crosses a threshold that prevents them from doing some normally routine task (eg, walking, tying
shoes).
Important associated symptoms include sensory changes, double vision, memory loss, difficulty using
language, seizures, and headaches. Factors that worsen weakness, such as heat (suggesting multiple
sclerosis) or repetitive use of a muscle (suggesting myasthenia gravis), are noted.
Review of systems should seek symptoms suggesting possible causes, including the following:
Daily fatigue and weakness that increases with heat and humidity: Multiple sclerosis
Diurnal variation of fatigue and weakness: Myasthenia gravis
Rash: Dermatomyositis, Lyme disease, or syphilis
Fevers: Chronic infection
Muscle pain: Myositis
Neck pain: Cervical myelopathy
Vomiting or diarrhea: Botulism
Shortness of breath: Heart failure, a pulmonary disorder, or anemia
Anorexia and weight loss: Cancer or other chronic illness
Change in color of urine: Porphyria or a liver or kidney disorder
Heat or cold intolerance: Thyroid dysfunction
Depressed mood, poor concentration, anxiety, and loss of interest in usual activities: Mood
disorder
Past medical history should identify known disorders that can cause weakness or fatigue, including:
Thyroid, liver, kidney, or adrenal disorders
Cancer or risk factors for cancer (paraneoplastic syndromes—eg, Eaton-Lambert syndrome)
such as heavy smoking
Osteoarthritis (cervical myelopathy)
Infections
Clinicians should assess risk factors for possible causes, including those for infection (eg, unprotected
sexual intercourse, blood transfusions, exposure to tuberculosis) and stroke (eg, hypertension, atrial
fibrillation, atherosclerosis).
Complete drug history should be reviewed.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 8/19
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Family history should include known hereditary disorders (eg, hereditary muscle disorders,
channelopathies, metabolic myopathies, hereditary neuropathies) and presence of similar symptoms in
family members (suggesting a possible unrecognized hereditary disorder). Hereditary motor
neuropathies often go unrecognized in families because of variable, incomplete phenotypic expression.
Hammer toes, high arches in the feet, and poor performance in sports may indicate an undiagnosed
hereditary motor neuropathy.
Social history should note the following:
Use of alcohol: Suggesting alcohol myopathy
Illicit drug use: Suggesting increased risk of HIV infection, bacterial infections, tuberculosis,
or stroke due to cocaine use
Occupational or other exposure to toxins (eg, organophosphate insecticides, heavy metals,
industrial solvents)
Recent travel: Suggesting Lyme disease, tick paralysis, diphtheria, or a parasitic infection
Social stressors: Suggesting depression
Physical examination
A complete neurologic and muscle examination is done to identify localizing or diagnostic findings. Key
findings usually involve:
Cranial nerves
Motor function
Coordination
Gait
Sensation
Reflexes
Cranial nerve examination includes inspection of the face for gross asymmetry and ptosis; mild facial
asymmetry can be normal. Extraocular movements and facial muscles, including masseters (for
strength), are tested. Palatal weakness is suggested by a nasal voice quality; testing the gag reflex and
looking at the palate directly are less helpful. Tongue weakness is suggested by inability to clearly
articulate certain consonants (eg, saying "ta-ta-ta") and slurring of speech (lingual dysarthria). Mild
asymmetry during tongue protrusion may be normal. Tongue fasciculations may be seen in patients
with advanced amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Sternocleidomastoid and trapezius strength is tested
by having the patient rotate the head and shrug the shoulders against resistance. The patient is asked
to blink repeatedly to see whether blinking fatigues.
Motor examination includes inspection, assessment of tone, and strength testing. The body is
inspected for kyphoscoliosis (sometimes suggesting chronic weakness of paraspinal muscles) and for
surgical and traumatic scars. Dystonic posturing (eg, torticollis) may interfere with movement, mimicking
weakness. Muscles are inspected for fasciculations and atrophy; both may begin focally or
asymmetrically in patients with ALS. Diffuse atrophy may be most evident in the hands, face, and
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 9/19
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
shoulder girdle. If myasthenia gravis is suspected, patients are asked to look up for a prolonged period
(minutes), noting if the eyelids start to droop.
Muscle tone is assessed using passive motion. Tapping a muscle (eg, hypothenar) may induce
fasciculations in neuropathies or a myotonic contraction in myotonic dystrophy.
Strength testing should include muscles that are proximal, distal, extensor, and flexor. Some tests of
large, proximal muscles include standing from a sitting position; squatting and rising; and flexing,
extending, and turning the head against resistance.
Motor strength is often rated on a 0 to 5 scale:
0: No visible muscle contraction
1: Visible muscle contraction with no limb movement
2: Limb movement but not against gravity
3: Movement against gravity but not resistance
4: Weakness against resistance
5: Full strength
Although these numbers seem objective, rating strength between 3 and 5 (the typical levels during early
weakness, when diagnosis usually occurs) is rather subjective; if symptoms are unilateral, comparison
with the unaffected side improves discrimination. Describing specifically what the patient can or cannot
do is often more useful than simply assigning a number for level of weakness, particularly for assessing
changes in weakness over time. A cognitive deficit may cause motor impersistence (inability to focus
attention on completing a motor task), motor perseveration, apraxia, or incomplete effort. Malingering
and other functional weakness is often characterized by give-way weakness, in which normal strength of
effort suddenly gives way.
Coordination testing includes finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin maneuvers and toe-heel tandem gait to
check for cerebellar dysfunction, which can accompany cerebellar stroke, vermian atrophy (eg, due to
alcohol use disorder), some hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias, multiple sclerosis, and the Miller Fisher
variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Gait is observed for the following:
Ignition failure (temporary freezing in place when starting to walk, followed by involuntary
speeding up of gait [festination]): Parkinson disease
Apraxia, as when feet stick to the floor: Normal pressure hydrocephalus or other frontal
lobe disorders
Festination: Parkinson disease
Limb asymmetry, as when patients drag a leg, have reduced arm swing, or both:
Hemispheric stroke
Ataxia: Midline cerebellar disease
Instability during turns: Parkinsonism
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 10/19
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Walking on the toes and heels is tested; distal muscle weakness makes these maneuvers difficult.
Walking on the heels is particularly difficult when corticospinal tract lesions are the cause of weakness.
Spastic gait is notable for scissoring (legs flexed slightly at the hips and knees, giving the appearance of
crouching, with the knees and thighs hitting or crossing in a scissors-like movement) and walking on the
toes. A steppage gait (also referred to as marching gait: foot lifted high to avoid scraping toe) and foot
drop may occur with peroneal nerve palsy.
Sensation is tested; sensory deficits can help localize some lesions causing weakness (eg, sensory level
localizes the lesion to a spinal cord segment) or suggest certain specific causes of weakness (eg, distal
sensory loss helps confirm clinical suspicion of Guillain-Barré syndrome).
A truncal bandlike tingling and pressure in a dermatomal distribution is a spinal cord sign that occurs
with both intrinsic (within the spinal cord, such as with multiple sclerosis) and extrinsic lesions. Extrinsic
lesions may arise from a tumor, blood, abscess, or a sequestrated vertebral disk.
Reflexes are tested. If deep tendon reflexes appear absent, they may be elicited by augmentation with
the Jendrassik maneuver (eg, asking the patient to try to pull the hands apart while they are clasped
together). Hyporeflexia may be normal throughout life or occur with aging, but findings should be
symmetric and augmentation should elicit reflexes that are otherwise absent. The plantar (Babinski)
reflex is tested. The following responses suggest certain disorders or locations of lesions:
The classic Babinski reflex (the great toe extends and the other toes fan apart) is highly
specific for a corticospinal tract lesion (except in infants, where the reflex is physiologic
because the corticospinal tract is immature).
A normal jaw jerk and hyperreflexic arms and legs suggest a cervical lesion affecting the
corticospinal tract, usually cervical stenosis.
Anal tone, anal wink reflex, or both are reduced or absent in spinal cord injury but are
preserved in ascending paralysis due to Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Abdominal reflexes are absent below the level of spinal cord injury (except in ALS where
they are inexplicably preserved).
A cremasteric reflex can test the integrity of the upper lumbar cord and roots in males.
Evaluation also includes:
Testing for back tenderness to percussion (present with vertebral inflammation, some
vertebral tumors, and epidural abscess)
Straight leg raising (painful with sciatica)
Testing for scapular winging (suggesting weakness of the shoulder girdle muscles)
General examination
If patients have no objective motor weakness, the general examination is particularly important; in such
patients, nonneuromuscular disorders should be sought.
Signs of respiratory distress (eg, tachypnea, weak inspiration) are noted. The skin is examined for
jaundice, pallor, rash, and striae. Other important findings during inspection include the moon facies of
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 11/19
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Cushing syndrome and the parotid enlargement, smooth hairless skin, ascites, and vascular spiders of
chronic alcohol use.
The neck, axillae, and inguinal area should be palpated for adenopathy; any thyromegaly is noted.
Heart and lungs are auscultated for crackles, wheezes, prolonged expiration, heart murmurs, and gallop
rhythms.
The abdomen is palpated for masses, including a grossly enlarged bladder if spinal cord dysfunction is
possible.
Joint range of motion is assessed.
If tick paralysis is suspected, the skin, particularly the scalp, should be thoroughly inspected for ticks.
Red flags
In patients with weakness, the following findings are of particular concern:
Weakness that becomes severe over a few days or less
Dyspnea
Inability to raise the head against gravity
Bulbar symptoms (eg, difficulty chewing, talking, and swallowing)
Loss of ambulation
Urinary retention or incontinence, or fecal incontinence
Interpretation of findings
The history helps differentiate weakness from fatigue, defines the time course of the illness, and gives
clues to the anatomic pattern of weakness. Weakness and fatigue tend to cause different symptoms:
Weakness: Patients typically complain that they cannot do specific tasks. They may also
report limb heaviness or stiffness. Weakness usually has a particular pattern in time,
anatomy, or both. Difficulty working overhead, combing or brushing hair, ascending stairs,
or getting off a toilet seat all imply proximal muscle weakness.
Fatigue: Fatigue reported as weakness tends to have no temporal pattern (eg, “tired all of
the time”) or anatomic pattern (eg, “weak everywhere”); complaints center more on being
tired than on being unable to do specific tasks.
The temporal pattern of symptoms is useful.
Weakness that becomes severe within minutes or less is usually caused by severe trauma
or stroke; in stroke, weakness is usually unilateral and can be mild or severe. Sudden
weakness, numbness, and severe pain localized to a limb are more likely caused by local
arterial occlusion and limb ischemia, which can be differentiated by vascular assessment
(eg, pulse, color, temperature, capillary refill, differences in Doppler-measured limb blood
pressures). Spinal cord compression can also cause paralysis that evolves over minutes (but
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 12/19
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
usually over hours or days) and is readily distinguished by incontinence and clinical findings
of a discrete cord sensory and motor level.
Weakness that progresses steadily over hours to days may be caused by acute or subacute
disorders (eg, spinal cord compression, transverse myelitis, spinal cord ischemia or
hemorrhage, Guillain-Barré syndrome, sometimes muscle wasting caused by a critical
illness, rhabdomyolysis, botulism, organophosphate poisoning).
Weakness that progresses over weeks to months may be caused by subacute or chronic
disorders (eg, cervical myelopathy, most inherited and acquired polyneuropathies,
myasthenia gravis, motor neuron disorders, acquired myopathies, most tumors).
Weakness that fluctuates from day to day may be caused by multiple sclerosis and
sometimes metabolic myopathies.
Weakness that fluctuates over the course of a day may be caused by myasthenia gravis,
Eaton-Lambert syndrome, or periodic paralysis.
The anatomic pattern of weakness is characterized by difficulty performing specific motor tasks.
Anatomic patterns suggest certain diagnoses:
Proximal muscle weakness impairs reaching upward (eg, combing hair, lifting objects over
the head), ascending stairs, or getting up from a sitting position; this pattern is typical of
inflammatory myopathies.
Distal muscle weakness impairs tasks such as stepping over a curb, holding a cup, writing,
buttoning, or using a key; this pattern is typical of polyneuropathies and myotonic
dystrophy. Many disorders (eg, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy,
Guillain-Barré syndrome, myasthenia gravis, radiculopathies, Eaton-Lambert syndrome)
cause both proximal and distal weakness, but one pattern may be more prominent at first.
Bulbar weakness can cause facial weakness, dysarthria, and dysphagia, with or without
impairment of ocular movements; these manifestations are typical of certain
neuromuscular disorders, such as myasthenia gravis, Eaton-Lambert syndrome, or
botulism, but also certain motor neuron disorders, such as ALS or progressive supranuclear
bulbar palsy.
Physical examination further helps localize the lesion. First, general patterns are discerned:
Weakness that affects extensors more than flexors in the upper extremities or flexors more
than extensors in the lower extremities is a pattern that suggests central nervous system
causes.
Weakness primarily of proximal muscles suggests myopathy.
Weakness accompanied by hyperreflexia and increased muscle tone suggests upper motor
neuron (corticospinal or other motor tract) dysfunction, particularly if an extensor plantar
(Babinski) reflex is present.
Disproportionate impairment of fine finger dexterity (eg, fine pincer movements, playing
the piano) with relatively preserved grip strength indicates selective disruption of the
corticospinal (pyramidal) tract.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 13/19
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Complete paralysis accompanied by absent reflexes and severely depressed muscle tone
(flaccidity) occurs in sudden, severe spinal cord injury (spinal shock).
Weakness accompanied by hyporeflexia, decreased muscle tone (with or without
fasciculations), and chronic muscle atrophy suggests lower motor neuron dysfunction.
Weakness that is most noticeable in muscles innervated by the longest nerves (ie, distal
more than proximal, legs more than arms), particularly with loss of distal sensation,
suggests lower motor neuron dysfunction due to peripheral polyneuropathy.
Absence of neurologic abnormalities (ie, normal reflexes, no muscle wasting or
fasciculations, normal strength or poor effort during strength testing) or poor effort in
patients with tiredness or with weakness that has no temporal or anatomic pattern
suggests fatigue rather than true muscular weakness. However, if weakness is intermittent
and is absent at the time of examination, abnormalities may be missed.
Additional findings can help localize the lesion more precisely. For example:
Weakness accompanied by upper motor signs plus other signs such as aphasia, mental
status abnormalities, or other cortical dysfunction: A brain lesion
Unilateral upper motor neuron signs (spasticity, hyperreflexia, extensor plantar response)
and weakness involving an arm and a leg on the same side of the body: A contralateral
hemispheric lesion, most often a stroke
Upper or lower motor neuron signs (or both) plus loss of sensation below a segmental
spinal cord level and loss of bowel or bladder control (or both): A spinal cord lesion
Lower motor pattern of weakness in the hands (flexors and extensors both involved, with
atrophy of the hands and hyporeflexia) with upper motor neuron distribution weakness in
the legs (flexors weaker than extensors, hyperreflexia, positive Babinski and spasticity):
Structural cervical spinal cord disease (cervical spondylosis), syringomyelia (often associated
with a cape-like loss of pain and temperature and sparing vibration and proprioception
distally), or motor neuron disease (eg, ALS)
Weakness with lower motor neuron signs may result from a disorder affecting one or more peripheral
nerves; such a disorder has very specific patterns of weakness (eg, wristdrop in radial nerve injury).
When the brachial or lumbosacral plexus is damaged, motor, sensory, and reflex deficits are often
patchy and do not follow any one peripheral nerve pattern.
Determination of a specific causative disorder
Sometimes combinations of findings suggest a cause (see table Findings Related to Weakness
Suggesting a Specific Disorder).
TABLE
Findings Related to Weakness Suggesting a Specific Disorder
Findings Disorders to Consider
Rapidly progressive generalized Botulism
weakness; prominent ophthalmoplegia,
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 14/19
--- Страница 15 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Findings Disorders to Consider
dysarthria, and dysphagia, particularly if
preceded by gastroenteritis
Symptoms and signs suggesting
dissemination of lesions in time and
space, history of relapses and
Multiple sclerosis
remissions, monocular visual loss due to
optic neuritis, diplopia due to
internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Acute or chronic weakness, dysarthria,
dysphagia, hyporeflexia, excessive
cholinergic symptoms and signs (eg,
Organophosphate poisoning
salivation, lacrimation, urination,
pupillary constriction, abdominal
cramping, diarrhea, bradycardia)
Single brain lesion, such as acute stroke
Unilateral weakness, upper motor
(ischemic or hemorrhagic), tumor, or
neuron signs
abscess
Chronic progressive quadriparesis,
upper motor neuron signs, preserved Cervical myelopathy due to spondylosis
cranial nerves, normal jaw jerk
Prominent extraocular muscle palsy Myasthenia gravis, botulism, Miller
(possibly only diplopia during extreme Fisher variant of Guillain-Barré
gaze) syndrome
Fatigability detected by sequential
Myasthenia gravis
testing (eg, eye blinking)
Asymmetric limb weakness, dysarthria,
dysphagia, prominent tongue Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
fasciculations
If no symptoms or signs of true weakness (eg, characteristic anatomic and temporal pattern,
objective signs) are present and patients complain only of overall weakness, fatigue, or lack of energy,
clinicians should consider nonneurologic disorders. However, among older patients who feel too weak
to walk, determining the contribution of muscle weakness may be difficult because gait dysfunction is
often multifactorial (see Geriatrics Essentials: Weakness).
Patients with many disorders may be functionally limited but lack true loss of muscle strength. For
example, cardiopulmonary dysfunction or anemia can cause fatigue due to dyspnea or exercise
intolerance. Joint dysfunction (eg, due to arthritis) or muscle pain (eg, due to polymyalgia rheumatica or
fibromyalgia) may make doing physical tasks difficult. These and other physical disorders that cause
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 15/19
--- Страница 16 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
complaints of weakness (eg, influenza, infectious mononucleosis, renal failure) typically are already
diagnosed or are suggested by findings during the history, physical examination, or both.
In general, if history and physical examination do not detect abnormalities suggesting physical
disorders, these disorders are unlikely; disorders that cause constant, generalized fatigue with no
physiologic temporal or anatomic pattern (eg, depression; chronic fatigue syndrome; an as-yet
undiscovered systemic illness such as severe anemia, hypothyroidism, or Addison disease; an adverse
medication effect) should be considered.
Testing
In patients with fatigue rather than weakness, history and physical examination focus on identifying
subtle manifestations of underlying illness (particularly infections, endocrine and rheumatologic
disorders, anemia, and depression) that can be used to guide testing, but testing may be unnecessary.
Although many tests can be done if patients have true muscular weakness, such testing is often only
adjunctive.
If no true weakness is present, other clinical findings (eg, dyspnea, pallor, jaundice, heart murmur), if
present, are used to guide testing.
If patients have no abnormal clinical findings, test results are unlikely to be abnormal. In such cases,
testing practices vary widely. Initial tests usually include some combination of a complete blood count
(CBC), electrolytes (including calcium and magnesium), glucose, kidney and liver function tests, thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and hepatitis C serologic testing.
If sudden or severe true general weakness or any respiratory symptoms are present, forced vital
capacity and maximal inspiratory force must be tested to assess risk of acute ventilatory failure. Patients
with vital capacity < 15 mL/kg or inspiratory force < 20 cm H2O are at increased risk.
If true weakness is present (and usually after risk of acute ventilatory failure is assessed), initial testing
typically focuses on determining the mechanism of weakness. Unless the cause is obvious, routine
laboratory tests (CBC, electrolytes [including calcium and magnesium], glucose, kidney and liver function
tests, TSH, ESR, hepatitis C serologic testing) are usually done.
Tests done to determine the location and mechanism of weakness depend on clinical findings.
If brain upper motor neuron dysfunction is suspected, the key test is MRI. CT is used when MRI
testing is not possible (eg, in patients with an older, non-MRI compatible cardiac pacemaker).
If myelopathy is suspected, MRI can detect lesions in the spinal cord. It also detects other causes of
paralysis that may mimic myelopathy, including lesions of the cauda equina, spinal roots, and brachial
and lumbosacral plexuses. CT myelography may be used when MRI testing is not available. Other tests
are done (see table Some Causes of Muscle Weakness). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis may be
unnecessary for some disorders diagnosed during imaging (eg, epidural tumor) and is contraindicated if
CSF block (eg, due to epidural spinal cord compression) is suspected. CSF analysis is useful in patients
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 16/19
--- Страница 17 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
with Guillain-Barré syndrome; albuminocytologic dissociation (high protein level with a normal white cell
count) is almost pathognomonic.
If polyneuropathies, myopathies, or neuromuscular junction disorders are suspected, the key tests
that help differentiate these mechanisms of weakness are electrodiagnostic testing (electromyography
and nerve conduction studies).
After nerve injury, changes in nerve conduction and muscle denervation can take up to a few weeks to
develop, so electrodiagnostic testing may not help when the disorder is acute. However, these studies
can help differentiate among certain acute disorders, such as acute demyelinating neuropathy (eg,
Guillain-Barré syndrome), acute botulism, and other acute neuromuscular junction disorders.
If myopathy is suspected (suggested by muscle weakness, muscle cramping, and pain), muscle
enzymes (eg, creatine kinase [CK], aldolase, lactic dehydrogenase [LDH]) may be measured. Elevated
levels are consistent with myopathy but can also be high in neuropathies (reflecting muscle atrophy)
and very high in ischemic rhabdomyolysis. Also, levels may not be high in all myopathies. Regular crack
cocaine use can also cause chronically moderately elevated CK levels (mean value, 400 IU/L).
Clinicians can use MRI to identify muscle inflammation, as occurs in inflammatory myopathies. Muscle
biopsy may be necessary ultimately to diagnose myopathy or myositis. MRI or electromyography can
help find a suitable site for muscle biopsy. However, needlestick artifact can mimic muscle pathology
and must be avoided; thus, biopsy should never be done in the same muscle tested by
electromyography.
Genetic testing can help confirm certain hereditary myopathies.
If motor neuron disorders (eg, ALS) are suspected, tests include electromyography and nerve
conduction studies to confirm the diagnosis and exclude treatable disorders that mimic motor neuron
disorders (eg, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, multifocal motor neuropathy with
conduction block). Brain MRI may show degeneration of the corticospinal tracts when ALS is advanced.
Spinal cord MRI (or CT myelography) is done routinely to exclude spinal cord compression or other
myelopathies (see table Some Causes of Muscle Weakness).
Testing for specific disorders may be needed:
If findings suggest myasthenia gravis, an ice pack test and serologic testing (eg,
acetylcholine receptor antibody levels, sometimes anti–muscle-specific tyrosine kinase
antibodies)
If findings suggest vasculitis, autoantibody testing
If family history suggests a hereditary disorder, genetic testing
If findings suggest polyneuropathy, other tests (see table Some Causes of Muscle
Weakness)
If myopathy is unexplained by drugs, metabolic, or endocrine disorders, possibly muscle
biopsy
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 17/19
--- Страница 18 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
Treatment of Weakness
Causes of muscle weakness are treated. For patients with life-threatening, acute weakness, ventilatory
support may be needed.
Physical and occupational therapy can help people adapt to permanent weakness and minimize loss of
function, regardless of the cause.
Geriatrics Essentials: Weakness
Some decrease in deep tendon reflexes is common with aging, but asymmetry or absence of these
reflexes with augmentation is abnormal.
Because older adults are more likely to have preexisting sarcopenia, bed rest can cause debilitating
muscle wasting rapidly, sometimes after only several days.
Older adults take more medications and are more susceptible to drug-induced myopathies,
neuropathies, and fatigue; thus, medications are a common cause of weakness in older adults.
Feeling too weak to walk often has multiple causes. Factors may include the following:
Muscle weakness (eg, caused by stroke, use of certain substances or medications,
myelopathy due to cervical spondylosis, or muscle atrophy)
Hydrocephalus
Parkinsonism
Painful arthritis
Age-related loss of neural networks mediating postural stability (vestibular system,
proprioceptive pathways), coordination (cerebellum, basal ganglia), vision, and praxis
(frontal lobe)
Evaluation should focus on reversible factors.
Physical therapy and rehabilitation are generally helpful no matter what the etiology of the weakness is.
Key Points
Distinguish loss of muscle strength from a feeling of fatigue.
If fatigue has no anatomic or temporal pattern of weakness in patients with a normal
physical examination, suspect myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, an
as-yet undiscovered systemic illness (eg, severe anemia, hypothyroidism, Addison
disease), a psychologic problem (eg, depression), or an adverse medication effect.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 18/19
--- Страница 19 ---
22/01/2026, 13:50 Weakness - Neurologic Disorders - Merck Manual Professional Edition
If patients have true muscle weakness, first focus on determining whether weakness is
caused by dysfunction of the brain, spinal cord, plexuses, peripheral nerves,
neuromuscular junction, or muscles.
If patients have hyperreflexia and increased muscle tone (spasticity), particularly if
Babinski reflex is present, suspect an upper motor neuron (eg, corticospinal tract) lesion
in the brain or spinal cord; MRI is usually required.
If patients have hyporeflexia, decreased muscle tone, muscle atrophy, and muscle
fasciculations, suspect a lower motor neuron lesion.
If patients have hyporeflexia and predominantly distal muscle weakness, particularly
with distal sensory deficits or paresthesias, suspect polyneuropathy.
If patients have difficulty climbing stairs, combing hair, and standing up with
predominantly proximal muscle weakness and intact sensation, suspect myopathy.
Physical therapy is often helpful in improving strength.
Copyright © 2026 Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.
https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-disorders/weakness 19/19
