Acute Limb Ischemia
Peripheral arteries may be acutely occluded by a thrombus, an embolus, aortic
dissection, or acute compartment syndrome.
Acute limb ischemia may result from:
Rupture and thrombosis of an atherosclerotic plaque
Embolus from the heart or thoracic or abdominal aorta
Aortic dissection
Acute compartment syndrome
Symptoms and signs are sudden onset in an extremity of the 5 P’s:
Pain (severe)
Pallor
Paresthesias (or anesthesia)
Poikilothermia (coldness)
Pulselessness
Outcomes are best with early diagnosis, but pain, generally the earliest symptom, is nonspecific.
However, the pain of acute limb ischemia can be out of proportion to physical findings. Thus, acute limb
ischemia should be considered in patients at risk (eg, with known or suspected peripheral artery
disease) who have limb pain disproportionate to physical findings, particularly if onset is sudden.
The occlusion can be roughly localized to the arterial bifurcation just distal to the last palpable pulse (eg,
at the common femoral bifurcation when the femoral pulse is palpable; at the popliteal bifurcation
when the popliteal pulse is palpable). Severe cases may cause loss of motor function (paralysis is often
considered the sixth P of acute limb ischemia). After 6 to 8 hours, muscles may be tender when
palpated.
 1/3

 
Pearls & Pitfalls
Consider acute limb ischemia in patients at risk who have sudden pain out of proportion
to physical findings.
Cholesterol Embolization
Diagnosis of acute limb ischemia is typically based on clinical findings. Immediate angiography is
required to confirm location of the occlusion, identify collateral flow, and guide therapy.
Treatment
Embolectomy, thrombolysis, or bypass surgery
Treatment of acute limb ischemia consists of thrombectomy or embolectomy (catheter or surgical),
thrombolysis (systemic or catheter-directed), or lower extremity bypass surgery. In addition to the
clinical expertise available in the local environment, the decision to do surgical thromboembolectomy vs
thrombolysis is based on the severity of ischemia, the extent or location of the thrombus, and the
general medical condition of the patient (1).
A thrombolytic (fibrinolytic) medication, especially when given by intra-arterial catheter infusion, is most
effective for patients with acute arterial occlusions of < 2 weeks and intact motor and sensory limb
function (ie, a salvageable limb) (1, 2). Tissue plasminogen activator is most commonly used. A catheter
is introduced and directed to the occluded area, and the thrombolytic medication is given at a rate
appropriate for the patient’s size and the extent of thrombosis. Treatment is usually continued for 4 to
24 hours, depending on severity of ischemia and signs of thrombolysis (relief of symptoms and return
of pulses or improved blood flow shown by Doppler ultrasound). In a large observational study,
 2/3

 
between 1998 and 2009, 1-year amputation rates declined over time from approximately 15% to 11%
although 1-year mortality remained the same at approximately 40% (3).
Key Points
Acute limb ischemia is characterized by severe pain, pallor, paresthesias (or anesthesia),
poikilothermia (cold sensation), and pulselessness in the affected extremity.
Treatment consists of embolectomy, thrombolysis, or bypass surgery.
Despite treatment, approximately 11% of patients with acute limb ischemia require limb
amputation.
