Aortic valve
The aortic valve is one of the valves of the heart. It lies
between the left ventricle and the aorta.

• Common causes of aortic stenosis include rheumatic fever, degenerative calcification, and
congenital diseases such as unicuspid aortic valve, bicuspid aortic valve, tricuspid aortic valve
with commissural fushion, quadricuspid aortic valve and hypoplastic aortic annulus.
• Common causes of aortic regurgitation include dilation of the aorta, previous rheumatic fever,
infection, i.e. infective endocarditis, myxomatous degeneration of the aortic valve, Marfan's
syndrome and rupture of a congenitally fenestrated aortic cusp.
Bicuspid aortic valve
The most common congenital abnormality of the heart is the bicuspid aortic valve. In this
condition, instead of three cusps, the aortic valve has two cusps. This condition is often
undiagnosed until later in life when the person develops symptomatic aortic stenosis. Aortic
stenosis occurs in this condition usually in patients in their 40s or 50s, an average of 10 years
earlier than can occur in people with congenitally normal aortic valves.
Aortic Valve Replacement
Aortic valve replacement means that a patient's aortic valve is replaced by a different valve. The
aortic valve can be affected by a range of diseases and require aortic valve replacement. The valve
can either become leaky (regurgitant or insufficient) or stuck partially shut (stenotic). Aortic valve
replacement currently requires open heart surgery. Research is being done now to develop valves
that can be implanted using a catheter without open heart surgery. There are two basic types of
artificial heart valve, mechanical valves and tissue valves. Tissue heart valves are usually made
from animal tissues, either animal heart valve tissue or animal pericardial tissue. The tissue is
treated to prevent rejection and to prevent calcification.
There are alternatives to animal tissue valves. In some cases a human aortic valve can be
implanted. These are called homografts. Homograft valves are donated by patients and harvested
after the patient expires. The durability of homograft valves is probably the same for porcine tissue
valves. Another procedure for aortic valve replacement is the Ross procedure (after Donald Ross)
or pulmonary autograft. The Ross procedure involves going to surgery to have the aortic valve
removed and replacing it with the patient's own pulmonary valve. A pulmonary homograft (a
pulmonary valve taken from a cadaver) or a valvular prothesis is then used to replace the patient's
own pulmonary valve.
 
 2/3

The first minimally invasive aortic valve surgery took place at the Cleveland Clinic in 1996. [1]
Additional images
• • •
Heart seen from A mechanical artificial A replaceable model
above. heart valve with a of Cardiac Biological
pivoting disc. Valve Prosthesis.
