Aortic Dissection
Aortic dissection is the surging of blood through a tear in the aortic intima with
separation of the intima and media and creation of a false lumen (channel). The
intimal tear may be a primary event or secondary to hemorrhage within the
media. The dissection may occur anywhere along the aorta and extend
proximally or distally into other arteries. Hypertension is an important
contributor. Symptoms and signs include abrupt onset of tearing chest or back
pain, and dissection may result in aortic regurgitation and compromised
circulation in branch arteries. Diagnosis is by imaging tests (eg, transesophageal
echocardiography, CT angiography, MRI, contrast aortography). Treatment
involves strict blood pressure control and serial imaging to monitor progression
of dissection. Surgical repair of the aorta and placement of a synthetic graft are
needed for ascending aortic dissection and for certain descending aortic
dissections. Endovascular stent grafts are an option for selected patients with
descending dissections, especially when dissection involves the descending
thoracic aorta.
Patients who are Black, male, or older, and patients with hypertension are especially at risk for aortic
dissection (1, 2). Peak incidence occurs at age 50 to 65 years in the general population and at age 20 to
40 years for patients with congenital connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome).
 1/12

  
Aortic Dissection
3D MODEL
Classification of aortic dissection
Aortic dissections are classified anatomically.
The DeBakey classification system is most widely used (3):
Type I (Majority of dissections): These dissections start in the ascending aorta and extend at
least to the aortic arch and sometimes beyond.
Type II: These dissections start in and are confined to the ascending aorta (proximal to the
brachiocephalic or innominate artery).
Type III: These dissections start in the descending thoracic aorta just beyond the origin of
the left subclavian artery and extend distally or, less commonly, proximally. Type IIIa
dissections originate distal to the left subclavian artery and are confined to the thoracic
aorta. Type IIIb dissections originate distal to the left subclavian artery and extend below
the diaphragm.
The Stanford system is simpler:
Type A: These dissections involve the ascending aorta.
Type B: These dissections are confined to the descending thoracic aorta (distal to the left
subclavian artery).
 2/12

  
Thoracic Aortic Dissection (Stanford Type B)
IMAGE
© 2017 ELLIOT K. FISHMAN, MD.
Although dissection may originate anywhere along the aorta, it occurs most commonly at areas of
greatest hydraulic stress, which are the
Right lateral wall of the ascending aorta (within 5 cm of the aortic valve)
Proximal segment of the descending aorta (just beyond the origin of the left subclavian
artery)
Rarely, dissection is confined to individual arteries (eg, coronary or carotid arteries), typically in pregnant
or postpartum women.
Etiology of Aortic Dissection
Aortic dissections often occur in patients with preexisting degeneration of the aortic media. Causes and
risk factors include connective tissue disorders, atherosclerotic disease, systemic rheumatic diseases,
 3/12

  
and injury (see table Conditions Contributing to Aortic Dissection).
TABLE
Conditions Contributing to Aortic Dissection
Category Examples
Cocaine
Dyslipidemia
Atherosclerotic risk factors
Hypertension
Smoking
Bicuspid aortic valve
Coarctation of the aorta
Cystic medial necrosis
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Connective tissue disorders, congenital
or hereditary
Loeys-Dietz syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Turner syndrome
Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm
Aortic catheterization
Iatrogenic
Aortic valve surgery
Behçet disease
Systemic rheumatic diseases Giant cell arteritis
Takayasu arteritis
Trauma Deceleration injuries
Atherosclerotic risk factors, notably hypertension, contribute in more than two-thirds of patients. After
rupture of the intima, which is a primary event in some patients and secondary to hemorrhage within
the media in others, blood flows into the media, creating a false channel that extends distally or, less
commonly, proximally along the artery.
Pathophysiology of Aortic Dissection
The pathophysiologic sequence of aortic dissections involves
Aortic wall inflammation
 4/12

  
Apoptosis of vascular smooth muscle cells
Degeneration of aortic media
Elastin disruption
Vessel dissection
Dissections may communicate back with the true aortic lumen through intimal rupture at a distal site,
maintaining systemic blood flow.
Serious consequences of aortic dissection are common and include
Compromise of the blood supply of arteries that branch off the aorta (including coronary
arteries)
Aortic valvular dilation and regurgitation
Heart failure
Fatal rupture of the aorta through the adventitia into the pericardium, right atrium, or left
pleural space
Acute dissections and those present < 2 weeks are most likely to cause these complications. Risk
decreases at ≥ 2 weeks if evidence indicates thrombosis of the false lumen and loss of communication
between the true and false lumina.
Variants of dissection are thought to be precursors of classic aortic dissection. Variants of aortic
dissection include
Separation of the intima and media by intramural hematoma without a clear intimal tear or
flap
Intimal tear and bulge without a hematoma or false lumen
Dissection or hematoma caused by ulceration of atherosclerotic plaque
 5/12

  
Overview of Aortic Dissection
Hide Details
Aortic Dissection ( by Osmosis ( is
licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0 (
Symptoms and Signs of Aortic Dissection
Typically in aortic dissection, excruciating precordial or interscapular pain, often described as tearing or
ripping, occurs abruptly (1). The pain frequently migrates from the original location as the dissection
extends along the aorta. Up to 20% of patients present with syncope due to severe pain, aortic
baroreceptor activation, extracranial cerebral artery obstruction, or cardiac tamponade. Hypotension
and tachycardia could indicate active bleeding.
Occasionally, patients present with symptoms of malperfusion (ischemia due to the obstruction
resulting from dissection), such as stroke, myocardial infarction, intestinal infarction, renal insufficiency,
paraparesis, or paraplegia, due to interruption of the blood supply to a particular vascular bed,
including the spinal cord, brain, heart, kidneys, intestine, or extremities. The interruption in blood
supply is most often due to acute distal arterial obstruction by the false lumen.
Approximately 20 to 30% of patients have partial or complete deficits of major arterial pulses, which
may wax and wane (1). Limb blood pressures may differ, sometimes by > 30 mm Hg; this finding
suggests a poor prognosis.
A murmur of aortic regurgitation is often heard in patients with proximal dissection. Peripheral signs of
aortic regurgitation may be present. Rarely, heart failure results from severe acute aortic regurgitation.
Cardiac tamponade may cause pulsus paradoxus and jugular venous distention.
Leakage of blood or inflammatory serous fluid into the left pleural space may lead to signs of pleural
effusion.
Occlusion of a limb artery may cause signs of peripheral ischemia or neuropathy.
 6/12

  
Renal artery occlusion may cause oliguria or anuria.
Pearls & Pitfalls
Approximately 20 to 30% of patients with aortic dissection have pulse deficits.
Symptoms and signs reference
1. Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presentation, Diagnosis, and Outcomes of Acute Aortic
Dissection: 17-Year Trends From the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2015;66(4):350-358. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2015.05.029
Diagnosis of Aortic Dissection
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), CT angiography (CTA), or magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA)
Aortic dissection must be considered in any patient with chest pain, thoracic back pain, unexplained
syncope, unexplained abdominal pain, stroke, or acute-onset heart failure, especially when pulses or
blood pressures in the limbs are unequal. Such patients require a chest radiograph; the mediastinal
shadow is often widened, usually with a localized bulge signifying the site of origin. Left pleural effusion
is common.
Patients presenting with acute chest pain, electrocardiography (ECG) changes of acute inferior
myocardial infarction, and a previously undocumented murmur of aortic regurgitation (AR) are of
particular concern for a type I aortic dissection into the right coronary artery (causing inferior
myocardial infarction), and the aortic valve (causing AR).
 7/12
If the chest radiograph suggests dissection, TEE, CTA, or MRA is done immediately after the patient is
stabilized. Findings of an intimal flap and double lumina confirm dissection.
Multiplanar TEE is 97 to 99% sensitive and, with M-mode echocardiography, is nearly 100% specific. It
can be done at the bedside in < 20 minutes and does not require contrast agents. However, CTA is
typically the first-line imaging modality because it is often available more rapidly and widely than TEE.
CTA sensitivity has been reported in the range of 90 to 100%, and specificity of CTA is 87 to 100% (1).
 8/12

  
MRA has nearly 100% sensitivity and specificity for aortic dissection. But it is time-consuming and ill-
suited for emergencies. MRA is best used when dissection is suspected in patients who are stable and
have subacute or chronic chest pain.
Contrast aortography is an option if surgery is being considered. In addition to identifying the origin and
extent of dissection, severity of aortic regurgitation, and extent of involvement of the aorta’s major
branches, aortography helps determine whether simultaneous coronary artery bypass surgery is
needed.
Echocardiography should be done to check for aortic regurgitation and thus determine whether the
aortic valve should be repaired or replaced concomitantly.
Electrocardiography (ECG) is nearly universally done. However, findings range from normal to markedly
abnormal (in acute coronary artery occlusion or aortic regurgitation), so the test is not diagnostically
helpful for dissection itself.
Serum creatine kinase-MB and troponin levels may help distinguish aortic dissection from myocardial
infarction, except when dissection causes myocardial infarction.
Routine laboratory tests may detect slight leukocytosis and anemia if blood has leaked from the aorta.
Increased lactate dehydrogenase may be a nonspecific sign of celiac or mesenteric arterial trunk
involvement.
A cardiothoracic surgeon should be consulted early during the diagnostic evaluation.
Diagnosis reference
1. Expert Panel on Cardiac Imaging, Kicska GA, Hurwitz Koweek LM, et al. ACR Appropriateness
Criteria® Suspected Acute Aortic Syndrome. J Am Coll Radiol 2021;18(11S):S474-S481.
doi:10.1016/j.jacr.2021.09.004
Treatment of Aortic Dissection
Beta-blockers and other medications to control blood pressure
Usually endovascular repair or open surgical repair
Patients who do not immediately die of aortic dissection should be admitted to an intensive care unit
with intra-arterial blood pressure monitoring and an indwelling urethral catheter to monitor urine
output. Blood should be typed and cross-matched for 4 to 6 units of packed red blood cells when
surgery is likely. Patients who are hemodynamically unstable should be intubated.
Medical management
Medications to decrease arterial pressure, arterial shear stress, ventricular contractility, and pain are
started immediately to maintain systolic blood pressure at ≤ 120 mm Hg (or the lowest level compatible
 9/12

  
with adequate cerebral, coronary, and renal perfusion) and to maintain a target heart rate of 60 to 80
beats per minute.
A beta-blocker is usually the first-line medication for heart rate and blood pressure control. Options
include
Metoprolol tartrate IV
Esmolol IV
Labetalol (an alpha- and beta-adrenergic blocker) IV
Alternatively, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) can be used to
control blood pressure and heart rate in patients who do not tolerate beta-blockers.
If systolic blood pressure remains > 110 mm Hg despite use of beta-blockers or nondihydropyridine
calcium channel blockers, nitroprusside can be given in a constant IV infusion, titrated as necessary to
control blood pressure. Nitroprusside should not be given without a beta-blocker or
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker because reflex sympathetic activation in response to
vasodilation can increase ventricular inotropy and aortic shear stress, worsening the dissection.
Pearls & Pitfalls
To manage blood pressure in aortic dissection, do not use a vasodilator (eg, nitroprusside)
without a beta-blocker or nondihydropyridine calcium channel blocker because the
vasodilator causes reflex sympathetic activation, which increases aortic shear stress.
Surgical repair
For a dissection of the descending aorta, a trial of medical therapy alone is appropriate for an
uncomplicated, stable dissection confined to the descending aorta (type B). Endovascular repair is
warranted in patients with complications (malperfusion, meaning ischemia due to obstruction
secondary to the dissection; persistent hypertension and pain; rapidly enlarging aortic diameter;
extension of the dissection; and rupture). Surgery is also best for acute distal dissections in patients with
Marfan syndrome.
For ascending aorta dissections, surgery is virtually always indicated due to the risk of life-threatening
complications. Surgery usually involves open repair and replacement, although endovascular therapy
can be used in certain circumstances when patients are not candidates for open repair.
The extent of repair depends upon the reason for repair and the anatomic nature of the dissection.
The goal of surgery is to obliterate entry into the false channel and reconstitute the aorta with a
synthetic graft. If present, severe aortic regurgitation must be treated by resuspending the aortic
leaflets or replacing the valve. Surgical outcomes are best with early, aggressive intervention. Mortality
rates are approximately 20% (1). Predictors of poor outcome include
Hypotension
 10/12

  
Renal failure
Age > 70 years
Abrupt onset of chest pain
Pulse deficit
ST-segment elevation on ECG
Stent grafts that seal entry to the false lumen and improve patency of the true lumen, balloon
fenestration (in which an opening is made in the dissection flap that separates the true and false
lumina), or both may be less invasive alternatives for patients with type B dissection if peripheral
ischemic complications develop. Some endovascular devices (Gore Ascending Stent Graft) are available
for compassionate use in patients with type A dissections who have contraindications to open surgical
repair.
Complications of surgery include death, stroke (due to emboli), paraplegia (due to spinal cord ischemia),
acute renal failure (especially if dissection includes renal arteries) and endoleak (leakage of blood back
into the aneurysmal sac).
The most important late sequellae include redissection, formation of localized aneurysms in the
weakened aorta, and progressive aortic regurgitation. These complications may require surgical or
endovascular repair.
Long-term management
All patients, including those treated by surgery or endovascular methods, are given long-term
antihypertensive therapy, usually including beta-blockers, nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers,
and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Almost any combination of antihypertensives is
acceptable; exceptions are those that act mainly by vasodilation (eg, hydralazine, minoxidil) and beta-
blockers that have intrinsic sympathomimetic action (eg, acebutolol, pindolol). Avoidance of strenuous
physical activity is often recommended.
CT may be done before discharge and repeated at 6 months and 1 year, and then every 1 to 2 years.
After repair of a dissection, the aorta should be monitored for the rest of the patient's life. The
weakened aorta may develop aneurysmal degeneration above or below the surgical repair or re-dissect.
For these reasons, continued surveillance is indicated.
Treatment reference
1. Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presentation, Diagnosis, and Outcomes of Acute Aortic
Dissection: 17-Year Trends From the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2015;66(4):350-358. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2015.05.029
Prognosis for Aortic Dissection
About 20% of patients with aortic dissection die before reaching the hospital. Without treatment,
mortality rate is approximately 1 to 2% per hour after symptom onset. Without surgery, mortality is >
 11/12

  
50% at 1 month (1).
Hospital mortality rate for treated patients is about 20% for type A dissection and 10% for type B
dissection (2). One of the largest international registry databases reported survival rates of > 90 percent
for type A dissections treated surgically at 1 and 3 years postdischarge. However, the 3-year survival
rate of patients with type B dissection was 78% for those treated with medical management alone.
Prognosis references
1. Tsai TT, Nienaber CA, Eagle KA. Acute aortic syndromes. Circulation 2005;112(24):3802-3813.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.534198
2. Evangelista A, Isselbacher EM, Bossone E, et al. Insights From the International Registry of Acute
Aortic Dissection: A 20-Year Experience of Collaborative Clinical Research. Circulation
2018;137(17):1846-1860. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.031264
Key Points
Aortic dissection may originate anywhere along the aorta but is most common at the
proximal ascending aorta (within 5 cm of the aortic valve) or the descending thoracic
aorta just beyond the origin of the left subclavian artery.
Dissection can present in patients with preexisting degeneration of the aortic media (eg,
caused by connective tissue disorders, injury) but hypertension is commonly also
involved.
Patients typically have excruciating, tearing precordial or interscapular pain.
Other manifestations depend on whether the aortic root and/or branches of the aorta
are affected, and the presence and location of any rupture; heart failure, organ
ischemia, and hemorrhagic shock may occur.
Diagnose using transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), computed tomography
angiography (CTA), or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA).
Immediately give beta-blockers and other medications as needed to control blood
pressure and heart rate.
Medical therapy alone is appropriate for uncomplicated, stable dissection confined to
the descending aorta; other cases require surgery.