Chest Pain
Chest pain is a very common presenting symptom. Many patients are well aware that it is a warning of
potential life-threatening disorders and seek evaluation for minimal symptoms. Other patients,
including many with serious disease, minimize or ignore its warnings. Pain perception (both character
and severity) varies greatly between individuals as well as between males and females. However
described, chest pain should never be dismissed without an explanation of its cause.
Pathophysiology of Chest Pain
The heart, lungs, esophagus, and great vessels provide afferent visceral input through the same thoracic
autonomic ganglia. A painful stimulus in these organs is typically perceived as originating in the chest,
but because afferent nerve fibers overlap in the dorsal ganglia, thoracic pain may be felt (as referred
pain) anywhere between the umbilicus and the ear, including the upper extremities.
Painful stimuli from thoracic organs can cause discomfort described as pressure, tearing, gas with the
urge to eructate, indigestion, burning or aching. Uncommonly, other descriptions of chest pain are given
such as stabbing or sharp needle-like pain. When the sensation is visceral in origin, many patients deny
they are having pain and insist it is merely “discomfort.”
Etiology of Chest Pain
Many disorders cause chest pain or discomfort. These disorders may involve the cardiovascular,
gastrointestinal, pulmonary, neurologic, or musculoskeletal systems (see table Some Causes of Chest
Pain).
Some disorders are immediately life threatening:
Acute coronary syndromes (acute myocardial infarction/unstable angina)
Thoracic aortic dissection
Tension pneumothorax
Esophageal rupture
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
 1/13

  
Other causes range from serious, potential threats to life to causes that are simply uncomfortable.
Overall, the most common causes are
Chest wall disorders (ie, those involving muscle, rib, or cartilage)
Pleural disorders
Gastrointestinal disorders (eg, gastroesophageal reflux disease, esophageal spasm, ulcer
disease, cholelithiasis)
Acute coronary syndromes and stable angina
In some cases, no cause can be confirmed even after a full evaluation.
TABLE
Some Causes of Chest Pain
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Cardiovascular
Serial ECGs and cardiac
biomarkers
Sometimes
Acute, crushing pain echocardiogram
radiating to the jaw or arm (traditional, POCUS, or
both)
Exertional pain relieved by
1
Myocardial ischemia rest (angina pectoris) Stress imaging test or CT
(acute myocardial
angiography considered in
S4 gallop
infarction/unstable
patients with negative or
angina/ angina) Sometimes systolic
unchanged ECG findings
murmurs of mitral
and no cardiac biomarker
regurgitation
elevation on serial testing
Often red flag findings‡
Often heart
catheterization and
coronary angiography if
findings are positive
1
Thoracic aortic dissection Sudden, tearing pain D-dimer in patients who
radiating to the back are at low risk
Some patients have Chest radiograph, which
syncope, stroke, or leg may reveal widening of
ischemia the mediastinum
Pulse or blood pressure In patients who are
that may be unequal in hemodynamically stable:
 2/13

  
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
extremities CT angiogram, possibly
subsequent MR
Age > 55 years
angiography or TEE
Hypertension
In patients who are
Red flag findings‡
hemodynamically
unstable: bedside TEE
Fever, dyspnea, fatigue, ECG
chest pain (if
Serum cardiac biomarkers
myopericarditis), recent
ESR
2 Myocarditis viral or other infection
C-reactive protein
Sometimes findings of
heart failure, pericarditis, Usually echocardiography
or both or cardiac MRI
Constant or intermittent
ECG
sharp pain often
aggravated by breathing, Serum cardiac biomarkers
swallowing food, or supine (sometimes showing
position and relieved by minimal elevation of
sitting or leaning forward troponin and CK-MB levels
2
Pericarditis if associated myocarditis
Pericardial friction rub
present)
Jugular venous distention
Transthoracic
(if constrictive pericarditis
echocardiogram to
or large or rapidly
evaluate for pericardial
accumulating pericardial
effusion
effusion)
Gastrointestinal
Sudden, severe pain
following vomiting or
instrumentation (eg,
esophagogastroscopy or
Chest radiography
transesophageal
1 Esophagography with
Esophageal rupture echocardiography)
water-soluble contrast for
Subcutaneous crepitus
confirmation
detected during
auscultation
Red flag findings‡
 3/13

  
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Pain in the epigastrium or
lower chest that is often
worse when lying flat and
is relieved by leaning
forward
Vomiting
Serum lipase (> 3 times
2 Upper abdominal upper limit of normal)
Pancreatitis
tenderness
Abdominal CT
Shock
Fever
Often history of alcohol
use disorder or biliary
tract disease
Ultrasonography of
gallbladder
Recurrent right upper
3 quadrant or epigastric Sometimes
Biliary tract disease
discomfort following cholescintigraphy (hepatic
meals (but not exertion)
iminodiacetic acid [HIDA]
scan)
Long-standing pain of
insidious onset that may
3 Esophageal motility or may not accompany Barium swallow
swallowing
disorders
Esophageal manometry
Usually also difficulty
swallowing
Recurrent burning pain
Clinical evaluation
radiating from epigastrium
to throat that is Sometimes endoscopy
3
Esophageal reflux (GERD)
exacerbated by bending
Sometimes motility
down or lying down and
studies
relieved by antacids
3
Peptic ulcer Recurrent, vague Clinical evaluation
epigastric discomfort,
Sometimes endoscopy
particularly in a patient
who smokes or uses Sometimes testing for
alcohol excessively, that is Helicobacter pylori
 4/13

  
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
relieved by food, antacids,
or both
No red flag findings
(unless perforated or
bleeding)‡
Pulmonary
Risk stratification (Wells
Criteria, Pulmonary
Embolism Rule-out Criteria
[PERC rule], Revised
Geneva Scoring System)
ECG, chest radiography,
Often pleuritic pain, BNP, troponin (evaluate
dyspnea, tachycardia alternative diagnosis, and
provide prognostic
Sometimes mild fever,
1
Pulmonary embolism information)
hemoptysis, shock
Sometimes POCUS (right
More likely when risk
ventricular size and
factors are present
function, interventricular
septum, inferior vena
cava)
Sometimes D-dimer
Sometimes CT pulmonary
angiography
Significant dyspnea,
hypotension, neck vein
Usually clinical evaluation
distention, unilateral
Obvious on chest
diminished breath sounds
1
Tension pneumothorax radiograph
and hyperresonance to
percussion Sometimes immediate
POCUS
Sometimes subcutaneous
air
2
Pneumonia Fever, chills, cough, and Chest radiography
sometimes purulent
sputum
Often dyspnea,
tachycardia, signs of
 5/13

  
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
consolidation
Sometimes, pleuritic chest
Chest radiography
pain, unilateral diminished
2
Pneumothorax
Sometimes POCUS or
breath sounds, and/or
chest CT
subcutaneous air
May have preceding
pneumonia, pulmonary
embolism, or viral
Usually clinical evaluation
respiratory infection
3
Pleuritis
Sometimes chest
Pain with breathing, cough
radiography
Sometimes a pleural rub,
but otherwise examination
unremarkable
Other
Variable but sometimes
Chest radiography
pleuritic pain
Chest CT if plain
Sometimes chronic cough,
radiograph findings are
2
Various thoracic cancers
smoking history, signs of
compatible with cancer
chronic illness (weight
Bone scan considered for
loss, fever), cervical
persistent, focal rib pain
lymphadenopathy
Often suggested by history
Pain typically persistent
3
Musculoskeletal chest
(typically days or longer),
wall pain (eg, due to
worsened with passive Clinical evaluation
trauma, overuse, or
and active motion
costochondritis)
Diffuse or focal
tenderness
Nearly constant pain,
affecting multiple areas of
the body as well as the
3 chest
Fibromyalgia Clinical evaluation
Typically, fatigue and poor
sleep
Multiple trigger points
 6/13

  
Cause* Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Sharp, band-like pain in
the thorax unilaterally
Classic dermatomal,
3
Herpes zoster infection Clinical evaluation
unilateral, vesicular rash
Pain may precede rash by
several days
Various features
3
Idiopathic Diagnosis of exclusion
No red flag findings‡
* Seriousness of causes varies as indicated:
1
Immediate life threats.
2
Potential life threats.
3
Uncomfortable but usually not dangerous.
† Most patients with chest pain should have pulse oximetry, ECG, and chest radiography
(basic tests). If there is suspicion of coronary ischemia, serum cardiac biomarkers (troponin,
CK-MB) should also be checked.
‡ Red flag findings include abnormal vital signs (tachycardia, bradycardia, tachypnea,
hypotension), signs of hypoperfusion (eg, confusion, ashen color, diaphoresis), shortness of
breath, asymmetric breath sounds or pulses, new heart murmurs, or pulsus paradoxus > 10
mm Hg.
BNP = brain (B-type) natriuretic peptide; CK-MB = creatine kinase, MB fraction; ESR =
erythrocyte sedimentation rate; POCUS = point-of-care ultrasound; S4 = fourth heart sound;
TEE = transesophageal echocardiogram.
Evaluation of Chest Pain
History
History of present illness should note the location, duration, character, and quality of the pain. The
patient should be asked about any precipitating events (eg, straining or overuse of chest muscles), as
well as any triggering and relieving factors. Specific factors to note include whether pain is present
during exertion or at rest, presence of psychologic stress, whether pain occurs during respiration or
 7/13

  
coughing, difficulty swallowing, relationship to meals, and positions that relieve or exacerbate pain (eg,
lying flat, leaning forward). Previous similar episodes and their circumstances should be noted with
attention to the similarity or lack thereof and whether the episodes are increasing in frequency and/or
duration. Important associated symptoms to seek include dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, diaphoresis,
nausea or vomiting, cough, fever, and chills.
Review of systems should seek symptoms of possible causes, including leg pain, swelling, or both
(deep venous thrombosis [DVT] and therefore possible pulmonary embolism) and chronic weakness,
malaise, and weight loss (cancer).
Past medical history should document known causes, particularly cardiovascular and gastrointestinal
(GI) disorders, and any cardiac investigations or procedures (eg, stress testing, catheterization). Risk
factors for coronary artery disease (CAD—eg, hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, cerebrovascular
disease, tobacco use) or pulmonary embolism (eg, lower extremity injury, recent surgery,
immobilization, known cancer, pregnancy) should also be noted.
Drug history should note use of drugs that can trigger coronary artery spasm (eg, cocaine, triptans) or GI
disease (particularly alcohol, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
Family history should note history of myocardial infarction (particularly among first-degree relatives at
an early age, ie, < 55 years in males and < 60 years in females) and dyslipidemia.
Physical examination
The extent of physical examination is guided by clinical suspicion. Vital signs and weight are measured,
and body mass index (BMI) can be calculated. Pulses are palpated in both arms and both legs, blood
pressure is measured in both arms.
General appearance is noted (eg, pallor, diaphoresis, cyanosis, anxiety).
The neck is inspected for venous distention and hepatojugular reflux. The neck is palpated for carotid
pulses, lymphadenopathy, or thyroid abnormality. The carotid arteries are auscultated for bruit.
Lungs are percussed and auscultated for presence and symmetry of breath sounds, signs of congestion
(dry or wet crackles, rhonchi), consolidation (pectoriloquy), pleural friction rubs, and effusion (decreased
breath sounds, dullness to percussion).
The cardiac examination notes the intensity and timing of the first heart sound (S1) and second heart
sound (S2), the respiratory movement of the pulmonic component of S2, pericardial friction rubs,
murmurs, and gallops. When murmurs are detected, the timing, duration, pitch, shape, and intensity
and the response to changes of position, handgrip, and the Valsalva maneuver should be noted. When
gallops are detected, differentiation should be made between the fourth heart sound (S4), which is
often present with diastolic dysfunction or myocardial ischemia, and the third heart sound (S3), which is
present with systolic dysfunction.
The chest is inspected for skin lesions due to trauma or herpes zoster infection and palpated for
crepitance (suggesting subcutaneous air) and tenderness. The abdomen is palpated for tenderness,
 8/13

  
organomegaly, and masses or tenderness, particularly in the epigastric and right upper quadrant
regions.
The legs are examined for arterial pulses, adequacy of perfusion, edema, varicose veins, and signs of
DVT (eg, swelling, erythema, tenderness).
Pulsus paradoxus may be measured if there is clinical concern for pericardial tamponade (distant heart
sounds, jugular venous distension, unexplained dyspnea, tachycardia, or hypotension).
Red flags
Certain findings raise suspicion of a more serious etiology of chest pain:
Abnormal vital signs (tachycardia, bradycardia, tachypnea, hypotension)
Signs of hypoperfusion (eg, confusion, ashen color, diaphoresis)
Shortness of breath
Hypoxemia on pulse oximetry
Asymmetric breath sounds or pulses
New heart murmurs
Pulsus paradoxus > 10 mm Hg
Interpretation of findings
Symptoms and signs of thoracic disorders vary greatly, and those of serious and nonserious conditions
often overlap. Although red flag findings indicate a high likelihood of serious disease, and many
disorders have “classic” manifestations (see table Some Causes of Chest Pain), many patients who have
serious illness do not present with these classic symptoms and signs. For example, patients with
myocardial ischemia may say only that they have indigestion or have a very tender chest wall on
palpation. A high index of suspicion is important when evaluating patients with chest pain. Nonetheless,
some distinctions and generalizations are possible.
Duration of pain can provide clues to the severity of the disorder. Long-standing pain (ie, for weeks or
months) is not a manifestation of a disorder that is immediately life threatening. Such pain is often
musculoskeletal in origin, although gastrointestinal origin or a cancer should be considered, particularly
in patients who are older. Similarly, brief (< 5 seconds), sharp, intermittent pains rarely result from
serious disorders. Serious disorders typically manifest pain lasting minutes to hours, although episodes
may be recurrent (eg, unstable angina may cause several bouts of pain over 1 or more days).
Patient age is helpful in evaluating chest pain. Chest pain in children and young adults (< 30 years) is
less likely to result from myocardial ischemia, although myocardial infarction can occur in people in
their 20s. Musculoskeletal and pulmonary disorders are more common causes in children and young
adults.
Exacerbation and relief of symptoms also are helpful in evaluating chest pain. Although angina can be
felt anywhere between the ear and the umbilicus, it is typically consistently related to physical or
emotional stress, ie, patients do not experience angina from climbing 1 flight of stairs one day and
 9/13

  
tolerate 3 flights the next day. Nocturnal angina is characteristic of acute coronary syndromes, heart
failure, or coronary artery spasm.
Pain from many disorders, both serious and minor, can be exacerbated by respiration, movement, or
palpation of the chest. These findings are not specific for origin in the chest wall.
Nitroglycerin may relieve pain of both myocardial ischemia and noncardiac smooth muscle spasm (eg,
esophageal or biliary disorders); its efficacy or lack thereof should not be used for diagnosis.
Associated findings may also suggest a cause. Fever is nonspecific but, if accompanied by cough,
suggests a pulmonary cause. Patients with Raynaud syndrome or migraine sometimes have coronary
spasm.
The presence or absence of risk factors for CAD (eg, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, smoking,
obesity, diabetes, positive family history) alters the probability of underlying CAD but does not help
diagnose the cause of a given episode of acute chest pain. Patients with those factors may well have
another cause of chest pain, and patients without them may have an acute coronary syndrome.
However, known CAD in a patient with chest pain raises the likelihood of that diagnosis as the cause
(particularly if the patient describes the symptoms as “like my angina” or “like my last heart attack”). A
history of peripheral vascular disease also raises the likelihood that angina is the cause of chest pain.
Testing
Testing can involve ECG, cardiac biomarkers, and imaging tests (1). For adults with acute chest pain,
immediate life threats must be ruled out. Most patients should initially have pulse oximetry, ECG, and
chest radiographs. Sometimes, particularly in patients with hemodynamic instability, either a point-of-
care ultrasound (POCUS) or a complete echocardiogram can also be useful in further evaluating
potential life-threatening causes (2). Echocardiography can be particularly useful in identifying left
ventricular or right ventricular dysfunction, evidence of right ventricular pressure overload, valvular
pathology, pericardial effusions, and signs of pericardial tamponade.
If symptoms suggest an acute coronary syndrome or if no other cause is clear (particularly in patients
who are at risk), troponin levels are measured. Expeditious evaluation is essential because if myocardial
infarction or other acute coronary syndrome is present, the patient should be considered for urgent
heart catheterization (when available). Immediate catheterization is indicated in patients with ST-
elevation on ECG or in patients with non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) plus
high-risk features (eg, hypotension, ventricular arrhythmias, persistent chest pain despite optimal
medical management), or high risk score (GRACE risk score [3]). In these patients, catheterization within
90 minutes of arrival is considered standard of care. For patients at low risk and possible NSTEMI, non-
urgent catheterization along with expeditious non-invasive medical management can be pursued.
Some abnormal findings on these tests confirm a diagnosis (eg, acute myocardial infarction,
pneumothorax, pneumonia). Other abnormalities suggest a diagnosis or at least the need to pursue
further investigation (eg, abnormal aortic contour on chest radiograph suggests need for testing for
thoracic aortic dissection). Thus, if these initial test results are normal, thoracic aortic dissection, tension
pneumothorax, and esophageal rupture are highly unlikely. However, in acute coronary syndromes,
 10/13

  
ECG may not change for several hours or sometimes not at all, and in pulmonary embolism,
oxygenation may be normal. Thus, other studies may need to be obtained based on findings from the
history and physical examination (see table Some Causes of Chest Pain). Further, ST-segment
abnormality on the ECG may be nonspecific or due to antecedent disorders, so comparison with
previous ECGs is important.
Because a single normal set of cardiac biomarkers does not rule out a cardiac cause, patients whose
symptoms suggest an acute coronary syndrome should have serial measurement of the cardiac
biomarker troponin and serial ECGs. Medications for suspected acute coronary syndrome are begun
while awaiting results of the second troponin level unless there is a clear contraindication. A diagnostic
trial of sublingual nitroglycerin or an oral liquid antacid does not adequately differentiate myocardial
ischemia from gastroesophageal reflux disease or gastritis. Either medication may relieve symptoms of
either disorder.
Troponin will be elevated in acute coronary syndromes except unstable angina, and often in other
disorders that damage the myocardium (eg, myocarditis, pericarditis, aortic dissection involving
coronary artery flow, pulmonary embolism, heart failure, severe sepsis). Creatine kinase (CK) may be
elevated due to damage to any muscle tissue, but creatine kinase-MB isoenzyme (CK-MB) elevation is
specific to damage to the myocardium. However, troponin is the standard marker of cardiac muscle
injury. Advances in high-sensitivity troponin assays allow for more rapid serial evaluation of a possible
acute coronary syndrome. With improved negative predictive value, high sensitivity troponin also has
the potential to decrease the necessity of further testing in patients with negative biomarkers and has
been demonstrated to allow patients to be discharged more quickly (4). Guidelines recommend using
normal troponin levels and negative coronary CT scanning as a reliable strategy to exclude acute
coronary syndrome in patients with chest pain and no red flags (5 ). Following up negative initial testing
(acutely or within several days) with a stress ECG or a stress imaging test is also reasonable, particularly
when there is an intermediate to high clinical suspicion for coronary artery disease or elevated risk of
major adverse cardiovascular events (HEART score [6]).
If a pulmonary embolism (PE) is considered possible, D-dimer testing is done in patients who are at low
or intermediate risk. The likelihood of pulmonary embolism is affected by a number of clinical factors,
which can be used to derive an approach to testing. Many of these factors are included in scoring
systems that help determine the probability of PE such as the Wells Scoring System, the Revised
Geneva Scoring System, and the Pulmonary Embolism Rule Out Criteria (PERC—7, 8, 9).
In patients with chronic chest pain, immediate threats to life are unlikely. Most clinicians initially obtain a
chest radiograph and do other tests based on symptoms and signs.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
Pulmonary Embolism Wells Score
Evaluation references
 11/13

  
1. Writing Committee, Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, et al: 2022 ACC Expert Consensus Decision
Pathway on the Evaluation and Disposition of Acute Chest Pain in the Emergency Department: A
Report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol
80(20):1925–1960, 2022. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.750
2. Melgarejo S, Schaub A, Noble VE: Point of Care Ultrasound: An Overview. American College of
Cardiology: Latest in Cardiology. October 31, 2017.
3. Fox KA, Fitzgerald G, Puymirat E, et al: Should patients with acute coronary disease be stratified
for management according to their risk? Derivation, external validation and outcomes using the
updated GRACE risk score. BMJ Open 4(2):e004425, 2014. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-004425
4. Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, Schwemer T, et al: Diagnosis of myocardial infarction using a high
sensitivity troponin I 1-hour algorithm. JAMA Cardiol 1(4):397–404, 2016. doi:
10.1001/jamacardio.2016.0695
5. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al: 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline
for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation
144(22):e368–e454, 2021. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029
6. Fernando SM, Tran A, Cheng W, et al: Prognostic Accuracy of the HEART Score for Prediction of
Major Adverse Cardiac Events in Patients Presenting With Chest Pain: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. Acad Emerg Med 26(2):140–151, 2019. doi:10.1111/acem.13649
7. Wells PS, Anderson DR, Rodger M, et al: Excluding pulmonary embolism at the bedside without
diagnostic imaging: management of patients with suspected pulmonary embolism presenting to
the emergency department by using a simple clinical model and d-dimer. Ann Intern Med
135(2):98–107, 2001. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-135-2-200107170-00010
8. Le Gal G, Righini M, Roy PM, et al: Prediction of pulmonary embolism in the emergency
department: the revised Geneva score. Ann Intern Med 144(3):165–171, 2006. doi: 10.7326/0003-
4819-144-3-200602070-00004
9. Kline JA, Mitchell AM, Kabrhel C, et al: Clinical criteria to prevent unnecessary diagnostic testing
in emergency department patients with suspected pulmonary embolism. J Thromb Haemost
2(8):1247–1255, 2004. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2004.00790.x
Treatment of Chest Pain
Specific identified disorders are treated. If etiology is not clearly benign, patients are usually admitted to
the hospital or an observation unit for cardiac monitoring and more extensive evaluation. Pain is
treated with acetaminophen or opioids as needed, pending a diagnosis. Pain relief following opioid
treatment should not diminish the urgency of ruling out serious and life-threatening disease.
If pulmonary embolism is highly likely, anticoagulants should be given while the diagnosis is pursued;
another embolus in a patient who is not receiving anticoagulants may be fatal.
Geriatrics Essentials: Chest Pain
 12/13

  
The probability of serious and life-threatening disease increases with age. Many older patients recover
more slowly than younger patients but survive for significant time if properly diagnosed and treated.
Medication doses are usually lower, and rapidity of dose escalation is slower. Chronic disorders (eg,
chronic kidney disease) are often present and may complicate diagnosis and treatment.
Key Points
Immediate life threats must be ruled out first.
Some serious disorders, particularly coronary ischemia and pulmonary embolism, often
do not have a classic presentation.
Most patients should have pulse oximetry, ECG, cardiac marker measurement, and chest
radiograph.
Evaluation must be prompt so that patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction or
other criteria for intervention can be in the heart catheterization laboratory (or have
thrombolysis) within the 90-minute standard.
If pulmonary embolism is highly likely, anticoagulants should be given while the
diagnosis is pursued; another embolus in a patient who is not receiving anticoagulants
may be fatal.
