Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT) Prevention
It is preferable and safer to prevent deep venous thrombosis (DVT) than to treat it, particularly in
patients who are at high risk (see table Risk of Deep Venous Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism). DVT
prophylaxis begins with risk assessment. Risk, along with other factors, allows the proper preventive
modality to be selected. Preventive measures include
Prevention of immobility
Prophylactic anticoagulation (eg, low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, adjusted-
dose warfarin, direct oral anticoagulant)
Intermittent pneumatic compression
Inferior vena cava (IVC) filters do not prevent DVT but are sometimes placed in an attempt to prevent
pulmonary embolism (PE). An IVC filter may be used to help prevent PE in patients with lower extremity
DVT who have contraindications to anticoagulant therapy or in patients with recurrent DVT (or emboli)
despite adequate anticoagulation. Despite widespread use of IVC filters, efficacy in preventing PE is
unstudied and unproven.
(See also Deep Venous Thrombosis.)
Risk Assessment in DVT Prevention
Patients at low risk of DVT (eg, those who are undergoing minor surgery but have no clinical risk
factors for DVT, those who must be temporarily inactive for long periods, as during a prolonged [> 6
hour] airplane flight) should be encouraged to walk or otherwise move their legs periodically; no
medical treatment is needed. Dorsiflexion 10 times/hour is probably sufficient.
Patients at higher risk of DVT include those undergoing minor surgery if they have clinical risk factors
for DVT; those undergoing major surgery, especially orthopedic surgery, even without risk factors; and
bedbound patients with major medical illnesses (eg, most patients being treated in a critical care unit,
other patients with heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], chronic liver disease,
stroke). These patients require additional preventive treatment (see table Risk of Deep Venous
Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism). Most of these patients can be identified and should receive DVT
prophylaxis. Hospitalization itself is not considered a risk factor, and patients who are hospitalized but
not in one of these categories do not require routine DVT prophylaxis.
Nonmajor surgery is defined here as an operation that does not involve general
anesthesia or respiratory assistance.
DOAC = direct oral anticoagulant; DVT = deep venous thrombosis; PE = pulmonary
embolism; LDUH = low-dose unfractionated heparin; LMWH = low molecular weight
heparin; IPC = intermittent pneumatic compression.
Adapted with permission from Geerts WH, Heit JA, Clagett GP, et al: Prevention of venous
thromboembolism. Chest 119:132S–175S, 2001.
Treatment in DVT Prevention
DVT prophylaxis can involve one or more of the following:
Mechanical therapy (eg, compression devices or stockings, venous filters)
Pharmacologic therapy (including low-dose unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight
heparins, warfarin, fondaparinux, direct oral anticoagulants)
Choice depends on patient’s risk level, type of surgery (if applicable), projected duration of preventive
treatment, contraindications, adverse effects, relative cost, ease of use, and local practice.
Mechanical therapy for DVT prophylaxis
After surgery, elevating the legs and avoiding prolonged immobility, which places the legs in a
dependent position thereby impeding venous return, can help.
The benefit of graded compression stockings is questionable except for low-risk surgical patients and
selected hospitalized medical patients. However, combining stockings with other preventive measures
may be more protective than any single approach.
Intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) uses a pump to cyclically inflate and deflate hollow plastic
leggings, providing external compression to the lower legs and sometimes thighs. IPC may be used
instead of or in combination with anticoagulants after surgery. IPC is recommended for patients
undergoing surgery associated with a high risk of bleeding in whom anticoagulant use may be
contraindicated. IPC is probably more effective for preventing calf DVT than proximal DVT. IPC is
contraindicated in some patients who have obesity and may be unable to apply the devices properly.
For patients who are at very high risk of DVT and bleeding (eg, after major trauma), IPC is recommended
until the bleeding risk subsides and anticoagulants can be given.
The use of inferior vena cava filters should be avoided unless DVT has been confirmed, except in highly
selected patients.
 5/8

  
Pharmacologic therapy for DVT prophylaxis
Pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis involves use of anticoagulants.
The role of aspirin for DVT prophylaxis is largely limited to patients undergoing total hip or knee
replacement surgery (1).
Low-dose unfractionated heparin (UFH) 5000 units subcutaneously is given 2 hours before surgery and
every 8 to 12 hours thereafter for 7 to 10 days or until patients are fully ambulatory. Patients who
bedbound but are not undergoing surgery are given 5000 units subcutaneously every 12 hours until risk
factors are reversed.
LMWHs are more effective than low-dose UFH for preventing DVT and PE (2, 3, 4), but widespread use is
limited by cost. Enoxaparin 30 mg subcutaneously every 12 hours, dalteparin 5000 units subcutaneously
once a day, and tinzaparin 4500 units subcutaneously once a day appear to be equally effective.
Fondaparinux 2.5 mg subcutaneously once a day is at least as effective as LMWH in patients who are
undergoing nonorthopedic surgery and is possibly more effective than LMWHs after orthopedic surgery
(5).
Warfarin, using a target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0 to 3.0, is proven to be effective in
orthopedic surgery but is being used less frequently because alternative anticoagulants such as LMWHs
and direct oral anticoagulants are easier to administer.
Direct oral anticoagulants (eg, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban) are at least as effective and safe as
LMWH for preventing DVT and PE after hip or knee replacement surgery but are more expensive than
warfarin, and their cost-effectiveness requires further study (3).
With DVT prophylaxis, there is always a risk of bleeding during use of anticoagulants.
DVT prophylaxis in selected populations
For hip and other lower extremity orthopedic surgery, selected direct oral anticoagulants (eg,
rivaroxaban, apixaban), LMWH, fondaparinux, or adjusted-dose warfarin is recommended. For patients
undergoing total knee replacement and some other patients at high risk in whom anticoagulants cannot
be given because of a high risk of bleeding, IPC is also beneficial. For orthopedic surgery, preventive
treatment may be started before or after surgery and continued for at least 14 days. Fondaparinux 2.5
mg subcutaneously once a day appears to be more effective to prevent DVT than LMWH for patients
undergoing orthopedic surgery but may be associated with an increased risk of bleeding (5).
For elective neurosurgery, spinal cord injury, or multiple trauma, low-dose LMWH, as the first option, or
low-dose UFH is recommended.
For patients undergoing neurosurgery, physical measures (IPC, elastic stockings) have been used
because intracranial bleeding is a concern; however, LMWH appears to be an acceptable alternative.
Limited data support the combination of IPC, elastic stockings, and LMWH in patients with spinal cord
injury or multiple trauma.
 6/8

  
Preventive treatment is also indicated for patients who have a major medical illnesses that require bed
rest (eg, myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, heart failure). Low-dose UFH or LMWH is effective in
patients who are not already receiving IV heparin or thrombolytics; IPC, elastic stockings, or both may be
used when anticoagulants are contraindicated. For select patients with cancer who are at high risk (eg,
those with advanced pancreatic cancer) who are receiving chemotherapy, primary prophylaxis with
LMWH or certain direct oral anticoagulants (apixaban or rivaroxaban) may be considered (6, 7, 8, 9).
Prevention of post-thrombotic syndrome
In patients with symptomatic DVT who develop symptoms of post-thrombotic syndrome (eg, leg
swelling, pain, aching), the use of knee-high compression stockings providing 30 to 40 mm Hg pressure
is recommended, although stockings with lower tension (20 to 30 mm Hg) can be considered if patients
are unable to tolerate the higher tension stockings. However, the routine use of stockings in all patients
who have had a DVT has been questioned by data from a meta-analysis of randomized trials, in which
the use of compression stockings compared with placebo (none or sham-compression stockings) did
not show a significant decrease in post-thrombotic syndrome) (10).
Key Points
Treatment to prevent deep venous thrombosis is required for patients who are
bedbound with major illness and/or those undergoing certain surgical procedures.
Early mobilization, leg elevation, and an anticoagulant are the recommended preventive
measures; patients who should not receive anticoagulants may benefit from
intermittent pneumatic compression devices or elastic stockings.