Direct Current (DC) Cardioversion-Defibrillation
The decision to treat an arrhythmia depends on its symptoms and its potential severity. Treatment is
directed at causes. If necessary, direct antiarrhythmic therapy, including antiarrhythmic drugs, direct
current (DC) cardioversion-defibrillation, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs), pacemakers (and
a special form of pacing, cardiac resynchronization therapy), catheter ablation, surgery, or a
combination, is used.
A transthoracic DC shock of sufficient magnitude depolarizes the entire myocardium, rendering the
entire heart momentarily refractory to repeat depolarization. Thereafter, the most rapid intrinsic
pacemaker, usually the sinoatrial (SA) node, reassumes control of heart rhythm. Thus, DC cardioversion-
defibrillation very effectively terminates tachyarrhythmias that result from reentry. However, it is less
effective for terminating tachyarrhythmias that result from automaticity because the return rhythm is
likely to be the automatic tachyarrhythmia. For tachyarrhythmias other than ventricular fibrillation (VF)
and pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT), the shock must be synchronized to the QRS complex (called
cardioversion) because a shock that falls during the vulnerable period (near the peak of the T wave) can
induce VF. In VF, synchronization of a shock to the QRS complex is neither necessary nor possible. A
shock applied without synchronization to a QRS complex is defibrillation.
DC cardioversion or defibrillation can be delivered as
Monophasic current
Biphasic current
Monophasic current travels in one direction between the 2 electrodes. In biphasic devices, the current
reverses direction part way through the shock waveform.
Most manual and automated external defibrillators (AEDs) are biphasic because of potential safety and
efficacy advantages. In randomized trials including patients in the controlled setting of induced
ventricular fibrillation, the application of lower energy biphasic waveforms achieved similar defibrillation
efficacy compared with monophasic waveforms, which may result in less myocardial injury (1). However,
this potential benefit has not been proven when studied in trials of patients receiving either
monophasic or biphasic waveform defibrillation in the uncontrolled situation of out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest (2). Biphasic devices are also smaller in size (making them more portable).
Procedure for DC cardioversion
 1/3
 
When DC cardioversion is elective, patients should fast for 6 to 8 hours before the procedure to avoid
the possibility of aspiration. Because the procedure is frightening and painful, brief general anesthesia
or IV analgesia and sedation (eg, fentanyl and midazolam) is necessary. Equipment and personnel to
maintain the airway and provide additional support, if necessary, must be present.
How To Do Synchronized Cardiov...
VIDEO
The electrodes (pads or paddles) used for cardioversion may be placed anteroposteriorly (along the left
sternal border over the third and fourth intercostal spaces and in the left infrascapular region) or
anterolaterally (between the clavicle and the second intercostal space along the right sternal border and
over the fifth and sixth intercostal spaces at the apex of the heart). After synchronization to the QRS
complex is confirmed on the monitor, a shock is delivered.
The most appropriate energy level varies with the tachyarrhythmia being treated. Cardioversion and
defibrillation efficacy increases with use of biphasic shocks.
For defibrillation of ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia, the energy level for the
first shock in adults is
120 to 200 joules for biphasic devices (or according to manufacturer specification) although
many practitioners use the maximum device output in this setting
360 joules for monophasic devices (or according to manufacturer specification)
Subsequent shocks are at the same or higher energy level for biphasic devices and are at the same level
for monophasic devices.
For synchronized cardioversion of atrial fibrillation, the energy level for the first shock in adults is
120 to 200 joules for biphasic devices (or depending on manufacturer specification) (3)
200 joules for monophasic devices (or according to manufacturer specification)
 2/3
 
Subsequent shocks are typically at a higher energy level for both biphasic and monophasic devices.
DC cardioversion-defibrillation can also be applied directly to the heart during a thoracotomy or
through use of an intracardiac electrode catheter; then, much lower energy levels are required.
Complications of DC cardioversion
Complications are usually minor and include atrial and ventricular premature beats and muscle
soreness. Less commonly, but more likely if patients have marginal left ventricular function or multiple
shocks are used, cardioversion can precipitate myocyte damage and electromechanical dissociation.
