Dyspnea
Dyspnea refers to unpleasant or uncomfortable breathing. It is experienced and described differently by
patients depending on the cause.
Etiology of Dyspnea
Dyspnea has many pulmonary, cardiac, and other causes (1), which vary by acuity of onset (see tables
Some Causes of Acute Dyspnea, Some Causes of Subacute Dyspnea, and Some Causes of Chronic
Dyspnea).
The most common causes include:
Asthma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Heart failure
Myocardial ischemia
Physical deconditioning
Pneumonia
The most common cause of dyspnea in patients with chronic pulmonary or cardiac disorders is:
Exacerbation of their disease
However, such patients may also acutely develop another condition (eg, a patient with long-standing
asthma may have a myocardial infarction, a patient with chronic heart failure may develop pneumonia).
TABLE
Some Causes of Acute* Dyspnea
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach †
Pulmonary causes
Asthma, bronchospasm, Wheezing and poor air History and physical
or reactive airway disease exchange that arise examination
spontaneously or after
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach †
exposure to specific
Sometimes pulmonary
stimuli (eg, allergen, URI,
function testing or peak
cold, exercise)
flow measurement
Possibly pulsus paradoxus
Often a preexisting history
of reactive airway disease
Sudden onset of cough or
stridor in a patient
Inspiratory and expiratory
(typically an infant or
Foreign body inhalation chest radiographs
young child) without URI
Sometimes bronchoscopy
or constitutional
symptoms
Abrupt onset of sharp
chest pain, tachypnea,
diminished breath sounds,
and hyperresonance to
Pneumothorax percussion Chest radiograph
May follow injury or occur
spontaneously (especially
in tall, thin patients and in
patients with COPD)
Abrupt onset of sharp
chest pain, tachypnea, and
tachycardia
Often risk factors for
CT angiography
pulmonary embolism (eg,
cancer, immobilization, Less often, V/Q scanning
Pulmonary embolism
DVT, pregnancy, use of and possibly pulmonary
oral contraceptives or arteriography
other estrogen-containing
medications, recent
surgery or hospitalization,
family history)
Toxin-induced airway Sudden onset after Inhalation usually obvious
damage (eg, due to occupational exposure or by history
inhalation of chlorine or inappropriate use of
Chest radiograph
hydrogen sulfide) cleaning agents
 2/12

  
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach †
Sometimes ABG
measurement and
observation to determine
severity
Cardiac causes
Substernal chest pressure
or pain that may or may
Acute myocardial ischemia ECG
not radiate to the arm or
or infarction
Cardiac enzyme testing
jaw, particularly in patients
with risk factors for CAD
Sudden onset of chest
pain, new or loud
History and physical
Papillary muscle holosystolic murmur, and
examination
dysfunction or rupture signs of heart failure,
Echocardiography
particularly in patients
with recent MI
Other causes
Situational dyspnea often
accompanied by
psychomotor agitation
and paresthesias in the History and physical
Anxiety disorder causing
fingers or around the examination
hyperventilation
mouth
Diagnosis of exclusion
Normal examination
findings and pulse
oximetry measurements
Often sudden onset after
trauma affecting the Chest radiograph
Acute diaphragmatic
phrenic nerve‡
paralysis
Fluoroscopic sniff test
Frequent orthopnea
 3/12

  
* Acute dyspnea occurs within minutes of triggering event.
† Most patients should have pulse oximetry and, unless symptoms are clearly a mild
exacerbation of known chronic disease, chest radiograph.
‡ Dyspnea may be delayed and may occur mainly after exertion.
ABG = arterial blood gas; BNP = brain (B-type) natriuretic peptide; CAD = coronary artery
disease; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DVT = deep venous thrombosis;
ECG = electrocardiography; MI = myocardial infarction; S3 = third heart sound; URI = upper
respiratory infection; V/Q = ventilation/perfusion.
TABLE
Some Causes of Subacute* Dyspnea
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Pulmonary causes
Cough, productive or
History and physical
nonproductive
examination
COPD exacerbation Poor air movement
Sometimes chest
radiograph and arterial
Accessory muscle use or
blood gas measurement
pursed lip breathing
Fever, productive cough,
Chest radiograph
dyspnea, sometimes
pleuritic chest pain
Sometimes blood and
Pneumonia sputum cultures
Focal lung findings,
including crackles,
Complete blood count
decreased breath sounds,
with differential
and egophony
Cardiac causes
Angina or CAD Substernal chest pressure ECG
with or without radiation
Cardiac biomarkers (eg,
to the arm or jaw, often
troponin)
provoked by physical
exertion, particularly in Cardiac stress testing
Cardiac catheterization
 4/12

  
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
patients with risk factors
for CAD
Crackles, S3 gallop, and
signs of central or
peripheral volume
Chest radiograph
overload (eg, elevated
Heart failure BNP measurement
neck veins, peripheral
edema) Echocardiography
Orthopnea or paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea
Muffled heart sounds or
enlarged cardiac
silhouette in patients with
risk factors for pericardial
Pericardial effusion or
effusion (eg, cancer, Echocardiography
tamponade
pericarditis, SLE)
Possibly pulsus paradoxus
Orthopnea
Other causes
Basic metabolic panel
Metabolic acidosis Tachypnea
ABG measurement
Tachycardia, warm skin, lid
lag and exophthalmos TSH and free T4
Hyperthyroidism
(thyroid eye disease), measurement
tremor
* Subacute dyspnea occurs within hours or days.
† Most patients should have pulse oximetry and, unless symptoms are clearly a mild
exacerbation of a known chronic disease, chest radiograph.
ABG = arterial blood gas; BNP = brain (B-type) natriuretic peptide; CAD = coronary artery
disease; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ECG = electrocardiogram; SLE =
systemic lupus erythematosus; S3 = third heart sound; T4 = thyroxine; TSH = thyroid
stimulating hormone.
 5/12

  
TABLE
Some Causes of Chronic* Dyspnea
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Pulmonary causes
Progressive dyspnea and
cough
Occupational and
environmental exposure
(occupational lung disease
such as silicosis,
hypersensitivity
pneumonitis) may be High-resolution chest CT
Interstitial lung disease present
Pulmonary function
Smoking history, family testing
history, medication
history, or radiation
history may be present
Fine crackles, frequently
accompanied by dry cough
Clubbing
Extensive smoking history,
barrel chest, and poor air
entry and exit or wheezing Chest radiograph
(COPD)
Pulmonary function
Obstructive lung disease
Wheeze, cough, chest testing (at initial
tightness, episodic evaluation)
symptoms, characteristic
triggers (asthma)
Pleural effusion Pleuritic chest pain, lung Chest radiograph
field that is dull to
Often chest CT and
percussion and has
thoracentesis
diminished breath sounds
Sometimes history of
cancer, heart failure (due
to increased pulmonary
capillary pressure),
rheumatoid arthritis,
 6/12

  
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
systemic lupus
erythematosus, or acute
pneumonia
Progressive dyspnea in Pulmonary function
patients with a known testing
neuromuscular
EMG or nerve conduction
Neuromuscular disease impairment (eg
testing
amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis or muscular Sometimes blood tests to
dystrophies) determine the cause
Cardiac causes
Crackles, S3 gallop, and
signs of central or
peripheral volume
overload (eg, elevated Chest radiograph
Heart failure
neck veins, peripheral
Echocardiography
edema)
Orthopnea or paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea
Loud S2, parasternal
Echocardiography
heave, elevated jugular
Pulmonary hypertension
venous pressure, murmur
Right heart catheterization
of tricuspid regurgitation
Substernal chest pressure
with or without radiation ECG
to the arm or jaw, often
Cardiac stress testing
Stable angina or CAD provoked by physical
exertion, particularly in Sometimes cardiac
patients with risk factors catheterization
for CAD
Other causes
Normal lung examination
and pulse oximetry
measurement
Anemia Complete blood count
Sometimes systolic heart
murmur due to increased
flow
 7/12

  
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach†
Dyspnea only on exertion
History and physical
Physical deconditioning in patients with sedentary
examination
lifestyle
* Chronic dyspnea that has lasted for weeks to years. In many of these disorders, dyspnea is
initially present on exertion before progressing to dyspnea at rest.
† Most patients should have pulse oximetry and, unless symptoms are clearly a mild
exacerbation of a known chronic disease, chest radiograph.
CAD = coronary artery disease; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CT =
computed tomography; ECG = electrocardiogram; EMG = electromyography; S2 = second
heart sound; S3 = third heart sound.
Pathophysiology of Dyspnea
Although dyspnea is a relatively common problem, the pathophysiology of the uncomfortable sensation
of breathing is poorly understood. Unlike those for other types of noxious stimuli, there are no
specialized dyspnea receptors (although MRI studies have identified a few specific areas in the midbrain
that may mediate perception of dyspnea).
The experience of dyspnea likely results from a complex interaction between chemoreceptor
stimulation, mechanical abnormalities in breathing, abnormalities in cardiac function or venous return,
and the perception of those abnormalities by the central nervous system. Some authors have described
the imbalance between neurologic stimulation and mechanical changes in the lungs and chest wall as
neuromechanical uncoupling (1, 2).
Evaluation of Dyspnea
History
History of present illness should cover the temporal onset (eg, abrupt, insidious) and duration.
Severity can be determined by assessing the activity level required to cause dyspnea (eg, dyspnea at rest
is typically more severe than dyspnea only when climbing stairs). Healthcare professionals should note
how much dyspnea has changed from the patient’s usual state. Precipitating or exacerbating factors (eg,
allergen exposure, cold, exertion, supine position) and relieving factors should be identified.
Review of systems should seek symptoms of possible causes, including chest pain or pressure
(pulmonary embolism, myocardial ischemia, pneumonia); dependent edema, orthopnea, and
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (heart failure); fever, chills, cough, and sputum production (pneumonia);
black, tarry stools or heavy menses (occult bleeding, possibly causing anemia); and weight loss or night
sweats (cancer or chronic lung infection).
Past medical history should cover disorders known to cause dyspnea, including asthma, COPD, and
heart disease, as well as risk factors for the different etiologies:
Smoking history: For cancer, COPD, some interstitial lung diseases, and heart disease
Family history, hypertension, and high cholesterol levels: For coronary artery disease
Recent immobilization or surgery, recent long-distance travel, cancer or risk factors for or
signs of occult cancer, prior or family history of clotting, pregnancy, oral contraceptive use,
calf pain, leg swelling, and known deep venous thrombosis: For pulmonary embolism
Environmental and occupational exposures (eg, gases, smoke, asbestos) should be investigated.
Physical examination
Vital signs are reviewed for fever, tachycardia, hypoxia, and tachypnea.
Examination focuses on the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems.
A full lung examination should be performed, particularly including adequacy of air entry and exit,
symmetry of breath sounds, and presence of crackles, rhonchi, stridor, and wheezing. Signs of
consolidation (eg, egophony, dullness to percussion) should be sought. The cervical, supraclavicular, and
inguinal areas should be inspected and palpated for lymphadenopathy.
Neck veins should be inspected for distention, and the legs and presacral area should be palpated for
pitting edema (both suggesting heart failure).
Heart sounds should be auscultated with notation of any extra heart sounds, muffled heart sounds, or
murmurs. Testing for pulsus paradoxus (a > 12-mm Hg drop of systolic blood pressure during
inspiration) can be done by inflating a blood pressure cuff to 20 mm Hg above the systolic pressure and
then slowly deflating until the first Korotkoff sound is heard only during expiration. As the cuff is further
deflated, the point at which the first Korotkoff sound is audible during both inspiration and expiration is
 9/12

  
recorded. If the difference between the first and second measurement is > 12 mm Hg, then pulsus
paradoxus is present.
Conjunctiva should be examined for pallor.
Red flags
The following findings are of particular concern:
Dyspnea at rest during examination
Decreased level of consciousness or agitation or confusion
Accessory muscle use and poor air excursion
Chest pain
Crackles
Weight loss
Night sweats
Palpitations
Interpretation of findings
The history and physical examination often suggest a cause and guide further testing (see tables Some
Causes of Acute Dyspnea, Some Causes of Subacute Dyspnea, and Some Causes of Chronic Dyspnea)
(1). Several findings are of note:
Wheezing suggests asthma or COPD, although it can occur with other disease processes
such as heart failure, paradoxical vocal fold motion, tracheal stenosis, tracheomalacia,
relapsing polychondritis, and bronchiolitis.
Stridor suggests extrathoracic airway obstruction (eg, foreign body, epiglottitis, vocal fold
dysfunction).
Crackles suggest left heart failure, interstitial lung disease, or, if accompanied by signs of
consolidation, pneumonia.
However, the symptoms and signs of life-threatening conditions such as myocardial ischemia and
pulmonary embolism can be nonspecific. Furthermore, the severity of symptoms is not always
proportional to the severity of the cause (eg, pulmonary embolism in a fit, healthy person may cause
only mild dyspnea). Thus, a high degree of suspicion for these common conditions is prudent. It is often
appropriate to exclude these conditions before attributing dyspnea to a less serious etiology.
Consideration of pre-test probability and sometimes clinical prediction rules can help estimate the
likelihood of pulmonary embolism. Note that normal oxygen saturation does not exclude pulmonary
embolism.
Hyperventilation syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion. Because hypoxia may also cause tachypnea and
agitation, it should not be assumed that every rapidly breathing, anxious young person merely has
hyperventilation syndrome.
 10/12

  
Testing
Pulse oximetry should be performed in all patients, and chest radiography should be done as well
unless symptoms are clearly caused by a mild or moderate exacerbation of a known condition. For
example, patients with asthma or heart failure do not require a radiograph for each flare-up, unless
clinical findings suggest another cause or an unusually severe attack.
Most adults should have an ECG to detect myocardial ischemia (and serum cardiac biomarker testing if
suspicion is high) unless myocardial ischemia can be excluded clinically.
In patients with severe or deteriorating respiratory status, arterial blood gases (ABGs) should be
measured to more precisely quantify PaO2 and PaCO2, diagnose acid-base disorders stimulating
hyperventilation, and calculate the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient. Also, obtaining a basic metabolic
panel to measure the bicarbonate level can be useful to assess the chronicity of a respiratory acidosis.
Patients who have no clear diagnosis after chest radiograph and ECG and are at moderate or high risk
of having pulmonary embolism (based on a clinical prediction rule) should undergo CT angiography or
ventilation/perfusion scanning. Patients who are at low risk may have D-dimer testing (a normal D-
dimer level effectively excludes pulmonary embolism in a low-risk patient). See diagnostic criteria to
determine the likelihood of a patient having a pulmonary embolism.
Chronic dyspnea may warrant additional tests, such as CT, pulmonary function tests, echocardiography,
and bronchoscopy. If initial workup is inconclusive, cardiopulmonary exercise testing can be considered.
CLINICAL CALCULATORS
A-a Gradient
Treatment of Dyspnea
Treatment is correction of the underlying disorder.
Hypoxemia (in the absence of compensatory hyperventilation) is treated with supplemental oxygen as
needed to maintain oxygen saturation > 88% or PaO2 > 55 mm Hg (> 7.3 kPa) because levels above
these thresholds provide adequate oxygen delivery to tissues. Levels below these thresholds are on the
steep portion of the oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve, where even a small decline in arterial
oxygen tension can result in a large decline in hemoglobin saturation. Oxygen saturation should be
maintained at > 93% if myocardial or cerebral ischemia is a concern, although data suggest that
 11/12

  
supplemental oxygen is not beneficial in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction unless the patient
has hypoxia (1).
Morphine (eg, 0.5 to 5 mg IV) helps reduce anxiety and the discomfort of dyspnea in various conditions,
including myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, and the dyspnea that commonly accompanies
terminal illness. However, opioids should be used with caution in patients with acute airflow limitation
(eg, asthma, COPD) because they suppress the ventilatory drive and can worsen respiratory acidemia.
Key Points
Pulse oximetry is a key component of the examination.
Low oxygen saturation (< 90%) indicates a serious condition, but normal saturation does
not exclude one.
Accessory muscle use, a sudden decrease in oxygen saturation, or a decreased level of
consciousness requires emergent evaluation and hospitalization.
Myocardial ischemia and pulmonary embolism are relatively common, but their
symptoms and signs can be nonspecific.
Exacerbation of known conditions (eg, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
heart failure) is common, but patients may also develop new conditions.