Early Repolarization Syndrome
Early repolarization syndrome is a genetic disorder of cardiomyocyte ion
channel function (channelopathy). Patients are predisposed to polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF). Diagnosis is by ECG.
Some patients require an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).
Early repolarization refers to ECG findings typically including J-point elevation ≥ 0.1 mV, often with a
slurred or notched terminal QRS complex, followed by ST-segment elevation in ≥ 2 contiguous leads
other than V1 to V3. This ECG pattern is not uncommon, as it occurs in about 5% to 10% of the
population (1, 2, 3), especially in males, younger patients, and athletes. Most people with this early
repolarization ECG pattern do not manifest arrhythmias. However, early repolarization is substantially
more common in survivors of apparently idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (VF) (1, 2, 3). Early
repolarization syndrome refers to people with early repolarization in inferior or lateral leads (predicting
higher risk of arrhythmias) on ECG who also have had symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias (4).
Early repolarization syndrome appears to result from mutations that produce a
Gain of function of outward potassium current channels OR
Loss of function of inward sodium or calcium current channels
These ion channel changes magnify the normal small transmural voltage gradients during the plateau
phase of the action potential. These gradients produce a J-wave and J-point elevation on the ECG and
predispose to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia which can degenerate into ventricular fibrillation in
the absence of other causes of early repolarization (eg, hyperthermia or hypothermia, hypocalcemia,
hyperkalemia). The ECG changes are similar to those of the Brugada syndrome but appear in the
inferior or lateral leads in the early repolarization syndrome rather than in the right precordial leads of
the Brugada syndrome. This and other similarities has led to Brugada syndrome and early
repolarization syndrome being grouped as J-wave syndromes (4). Prior to the VT/VF, the early
repolarization pattern may become more exaggerated and the VT/VF may be precipitated by an episode
of myocardial ischemia. -
Early repolarization syndrome appears to be inheritable, but disease-specific gene mutations are rarely
identified, suggesting that the disorder is often polygenic.
The ventricular arrhythmias may cause palpitations and/or cardiac arrest. Syncope may occur but is
uncommon because VT that occurs with early repolarization syndrome rarely self-terminates (unlike
with some other disorders that cause VT in which syncope is more common).
Diagnosis of Early Repolarization Syndrome
Characteristic clinical and ECG manifestations
Clinical screening of first-degree family members
Diagnosis should be considered in patients who have had polymorphic ventricular tachycardia,
ventricular fibrillation, or sudden cardiac arrest (or a family history of those events) in the absence of
structural heart disease and who also have ECG changes showing an inferior and/or lateral early
repolarization pattern. The typical ECG finding of early repolarization is J-point elevation of ≥ 1 mm (≥ 0.1
mV) followed by ST segment elevation in ≥ 2 contiguous inferior and/or lateral leads. A probabilistic
diagnosis scoring system (the Shanghai Early Repolarization Syndrome Score System) for the early
repolarization syndrome has been proposed (1).
Because specific gene defects are seldom identified, genetic testing is not typically recommended for
patients or family members. However, first-degree family members should be evaluated clinically and
with an ECG.
Treatment of Early Repolarization Syndrome
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) if symptomatic
For patients who are asymptomaticbut have the early repolarization ECG pattern and no family
history of sudden death, no treatment is recommended because such patients are at very low risk.
Patients who have had cardiac arrest or who have demonstrated VF or polymorphic VT are at high
risk and have a class I indication for an ICD (1). An ICD may be considered for certain patients with the
early repolarization ECG pattern and certain other high-risk features (2).
When frequent ICD discharges need to be suppressed, quinidine, which blocks the outward potassium
current that may be increased in early repolarization syndrome, may be efficacious. IV isoproterenol
may be useful in patients who have multiple episodes of ventricular arrhythmias in quick succession
(electrical storm).
Key Points
Early repolarization syndrome is genetic and predisposes to polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia (VT), ventricular fibrillation (VF), and sudden death.
Consider the diagnosis in patients who have had unexplained polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, or sudden cardiac arrest and early repolarization in the
inferior or lateral leads on ECG.
Place an ICD in patients who have had cardiac arrest, ventricular fibrillation, or polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia.