Heart Transplantation
Heart transplantation is an option for patients who have any of the following and who remain at risk of
death and have intolerable symptoms despite optimal use of medications and medical devices:
End-stage heart failure
Coronary artery disease
Arrhythmias
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or other cardiomyopathy
Congenital heart disease
Transplantation may also be indicated for patients who:
Cannot be weaned from temporary cardiac-assist devices after myocardial infarction or
nontransplant cardiac surgery
Have cardiac sequelae of a lung disorder requiring lung transplantation
Absolute contraindications for heart transplantation are (1):
Severe pulmonary hypertension that does not respond to preoperative treatments
(although heart-lung transplant may be an option)
Anatomic incompatibility of the central pulmonary artery or pulmonary veins (although
heart-lung transplant may be an option)
Excessive alcohol use and poor medication adherence
Relative contraindications include (1):
Age > 70 years
Obesity
Life-limiting systemic disease: cancer; diabetes; pulmonary, kidney, cerebrovascular disease
Local or systemic infiltrative disorders (eg, cardiac sarcoma, amyloidosis)
General contraindications to transplantation (eg, active cancer, uncontrolled systemic infection, active
substance use disorder, nonadherence to therapy, limited life-expectancy for reasons unrelated to the
transplant) should also be considered.
All donated hearts come from brain-dead donors, who are usually required to be < 70 years and have
normal cardiac and pulmonary function and no history of coronary artery disease or other heart
disorders. Donor and recipient must have compatible ABO blood type and heart size. Pretransplant
waitlist mortality was 8.5 deaths per 100 person-years in the United States in 2023 (2).
(See also Overview of Transplantation.)
Bridge and destination ventricular assist devices (VADs)
Left ventricular assist devices and artificial hearts provide interim hemodynamic support for patients
waiting for a transplant (bridge-to-transplantation). In addition, ventricular assist devices are used to
treat some patients who are not candidates for transplantation (destination therapy). Infection, which
may originate at the skin insertion site of the drive lines, is a concern. Other risks include right heart
failure (acute or chronic), sepsis, device failure, and thromboembolism. Despite the risks, there are
patients who have survived and have been well for several years after these devices were implanted.
Procedure for Heart Transplantation
Donor hearts are preserved by hypothermic storage. They must be transplanted within 4 to 6 hours. Ex
situ heart perfusion, an in vitro pump system that perfuses the explanted donor heart with the goal of
improving graft survival, and potentially prolonging transplant viability > 4 to 6 hours is in early use and
development (1). These systems have also allowed the use of cardiac grafts retrieved from donors after
cardiac arrest.
The recipient is placed on a bypass pump, and the recipient's heart is removed, preserving the posterior
right atrial wall in situ. The donor heart is then transplanted orthotopically (in its normal position) with
aortic, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary vein anastomoses; a single anastomosis joins the retained
posterior atrial wall to that of the donor organ.
Immunosuppressive regimens vary but usually include anti-IL-2 receptor monoclonal antibodies, a
calcineurin inhibitor, and glucocorticoids (see table Immunosuppressants Used to Treat Transplant
Rejection).
Rejection
Incidence of acute rejection peaks at 1 month, decreases over the next 5 months, and levels off by 1
year. Approximately 15% of adult heart transplant recipients have an episode of rejection within the first
year after transplant (1). Many patients are asymptomatic, but some develop left ventricle dysfunction
or atrial arrhythmias.
Because graft damage can be irreversible and catastrophic, surveillance endomyocardial biopsy is
usually done once per year; degree and distribution of mononuclear cell infiltrate and presence of
myocyte injury in specimens are determined. Differential diagnosis includes perioperative ischemia,
cytomegalovirus infection, and idiopathic B-cell infiltration (Quilty lesions).
Clinical manifestations of rejection can be classified according to onset, duration (see table
Manifestations of Heart Transplant Rejection by Category). Histologic classification of rejection is graded
from 1 to 4. Mild rejection (grade 1) without detectable clinical sequelae requires no treatment;
moderate or severe rejection (grades 2 to 4) or mild rejection with clinical sequelae is treated with
glucocorticoid pulses (eg, methylprednisolone) and antithymocyte globulin as needed. The grading scale
for rejection reflects progressive degrees of abnormality on histologic examination of biopsy specimens.
TABLE
Manifestations of Heart Transplant Rejection by Category*
Rejection Category Manifestations
Hyperacute Cardiogenic shock
Accelerated Atrial arrhythmia, cardiogenic shock
Acute Heart failure, atrial arrhythmia
Dyspnea during exertion, low stress
Chronic
tolerance
* Most patients with heart transplant rejection are asymptomatic.
Cardiac allograft vasculopathy
The main long-term complication of heart transplantation is cardiac allograft vasculopathy, a form of
atherosclerosis that diffusely narrows or obliterates vessel lumina. Approximately 30% of adult heart
transplant patients develop some degree of cardiac allograft vasculopathy within 5 years of
transplantation (2). Its cause is probably multifactorial and relates to donor age, cold and reperfusion
 3/5

  
ischemia, dyslipidemia, immunosuppressants, chronic rejection, and viral infection (adenovirus in
children, cytomegalovirus in adults).
For early detection, surveillance stress testing or coronary angiography with or without intravascular
ultrasound is often done at the time of endomyocardial biopsy.
Treatment is aggressive lipid lowering with statins and control of hypertension with calcium channel
blockers or other agents (2).
Prognosis for Heart Transplantation
Survival rates at 1 year after heart transplantation are estimated at approximately 90%; they are
approximately 80% at 5 years (1).
Within 1 year, death most often results from acute rejection or infection; after 1 year, death most often
results from cardiac allograft vasculopathy or a lymphoproliferative disorder.
Functional status of heart transplant recipients alive at > 1 year is excellent; exercise capacity remains
below normal but is sufficient for daily activities and may increase over time with sympathetic
reinnervation. More than 90% of patients reach New York Heart Association class I cardiac status, and
the majority return to employment by 1 year after transplant (2, 3).
Key Points
Heart transplant is indicated for refractory heart failure.
Heart transplant requires lifelong immunosuppression and care, but has a reasonable
prognosis.