Heart in systemic disease
A wide variety of systemic diseases may affect the heart by a number of different
mechanisms, including increasing demands on the heart, causing arrhythmias, af-
fecting the structure of the heart or promoting cardiovascular disease and therefore
coronary heart disease.
Common cardiac associations with systemic disease include:
Endocrine and metabolic:
Diabetes mellitus: coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, congestive
heart failure.
Hyperthyroidism: supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation,
hypertension.
Hypothyroidism: bradycardia, dilated cardiomyopathy, heart failure, pericar-
dial effusion.
Malignant carcinoid: tricuspid and pulmonary valve disease, right heart
failure.
Phaeochromocytoma: hypertension, tachycardia, congestive heart failure.
Acromegaly: heart failure.
Haemochromatosis: heart failure, arrhythmias, heart block.
Anderson-Fabry disease: arrhythmias, coronary artery disease, heart failure.
Nutrition:
Malnutrition: dilated cardiomyopathy, heart failure.
Thiamine deficiency: high-output heart failure, dilated cardiomyopathy.
Hyperhomocysteinaemia: premature atherosclerosis.
Obesity: cardiomyopathy, heart failure.
Multisystem diseases:
Rheumatoid arthritis: pericarditis, pericardial effusion, coronary arteritis, my-
ocarditis, valvulitis.
 2/9
 
Seronegative arthropathies: aortitis, aortic and mitral insufficiency, conduc-
tion abnormalities.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): pericarditis, Libman-Sacks endocardi-
tis, myocarditis, thrombosis (arterial and venous).
Amyloidosis: heart failure, restrictive cardiomyopathy, valvular regurgitation,
pericardial effusion.
Sarcoidosis: heart failure, dilated or restrictive cardiomyopathy, ventricular
arrhythmias, heart block.
Marfan's syndrome: aortic aneurysm and dissection, aortic insufficiency, mi-
tral valve prolapse.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: aortic and coronary aneurysms, mitral valve
prolapse.
HIV infection: myocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion.
Heart failure
Heart failure may be caused or precipitated by any condition that puts a greater de-
mand on the heart - eg, fever, severe anaemia, thyrotoxicosis and pregnancy.
Atherosclerosis
Coronary arteries may be involved in Kawasaki disease and, very rarely, in late
syphilis.
The association between coronary heart disease and diabetes is as well known.
It is also well known to be associated with abnormalities of lipid metabolism, in-
cluding the metabolic syndrome.[1]
There is also a strong relationship between coronary heart disease and rheuma-
toid arthritis.[2]
Hypertension
Any cause of secondary hypertension, such as renal disease (eg, glomerulonephri-
tis, polyarteritis nodosa, systemic sclerosis, chronic pyelonephritis, or polycystic kid-
neys), or endocrine disease (eg, Cushing's syndrome, Conn's syndrome, phaeochro-
 3/9
 
mocytoma, acromegaly, hyperparathyroidism), may cause hypertensive heart dis-
ease, which may lead to left ventricular hypertrophy.
Lung disease
Disease of the lungs can also lead to right ventricular hypertrophy and strain.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), including that due to the gen-
eral disease of cystic fibrosis.
Recurrent pulmonary embolism.
Primary pulmonary hypertension.
Rheumatic fever
Rheumatic fever is now very uncommon in Western Europe, although it is still seen in
other parts of the world, especially Africa.[3]
Rheumatic fever may cause disease of the mitral valve and/or the aortic valve.
This is usually mitral stenosis or aortic stenosis but mitral regurgitation or aortic
regurgitation may occur alone or in combination.
Acute rheumatic fever is also associated with myocarditis, which can be severe.
A soft, rumbling, mid-diastolic murmur, called the Carey Coombs' murmur, may
be heard during active disease. Severe disease is associated with a greater risk
of recurrence.
Other causes of valvular heart disease
As rheumatic fever appears to be confined to history, at least in the UK, other causes
of disease of heart valves take importance. Many are congenital heart disease.
Ankylosing spondylitis may be associated with aortic regurgitation.
Incompetent valves, including mitral valve prolapse may occur with a number of
the hypermobility syndromes, including Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan's syn-
drome, Down's syndrome and joint hypermobility syndrome.
Marfan's syndrome may cause aortic regurgitation and even aortic aneurysm at
the root.
 4/9
 
Another cause of aneurysm of the proximal aorta with aortic regurgitation is ter-
tiary syphilis.
Heart valves may be affected in many systemic autoimmune diseases, such as
rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, the seronegative
spondyloarthropathies, the systemic vasculitides and scleroderma.[4]
Any damage or abnormality of the heart or valves makes them susceptible to suba-
cute bacterial endocarditis. Acute bacterial endocarditis can occur when drug ad-
dicts inject themselves with heavily infected material.
Pericardial disease
See the separate Acute Pericarditis, Chronic Pericarditis and Pericardial Effusion
articles. These are often associated with systemic disease and they are often in-
flammatory diseases or infections.
Constrictive pericarditis may impair adequate filling of the heart. Tuberculosis is
one possible cause. Pericardial effusion can further constrict the heart and
cause cardiac tamponade.
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy is discussed much more fully in the separate Cardiomyopathies
article. They may be primary or due to other disease. Many systemic diseases may
cause cardiomyopathy, including:
Sarcoidosis.
Metabolic: diabetes, amyloidosis, Wilson's disease, haemochromatosis, glyco-
gen storage diseases.
Drugs and poisons:
Around 7 or 8 units of alcohol (>80g) a day for at least five years are required
to develop cardiomyopathy.[5] However, it is probably an underdiagnosed
cause and may represent 30% of dilated cardiomyopathy. Women are sus-
ceptible at a lower dose than men. High consumption of alcohol also leads
to hypertension.
Many other substances have been implicated. Examples include cocaine,
amphetamines, chemotherapy for malignancy.[6]
 5/9
 
Cardiomyopathy may occur in patients on long-term dialysis.
Endocrine disease: acromegaly, phaeochromocytoma, diabetes mellitus (ma-
ternal diabetes can also have an adverse effect on the developing fetal heart),
[7] hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism.
Connective tissue disorders: systemic sclerosis (may cause myocarditis or peri-
cardial effusion), rheumatoid arthritis (can cause pericardial effusion, valvulitis
and myocardial fibrosis), SLE (is associated with pericarditis, hypertension, an in-
creased risk of coronary heart disease and Libman-Sacks endocarditis).
Infections: acute viral infection (especially Coxsackie B), South American try-
panosomiasis (Chagas' disease), hepatitis B, HIV infection.
Nutritional: malnutrition, vitamin B1 deficiency, obesity.
Myopathies: Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker's muscular dystrophy.
Malignant disease
Metastatic spread of malignancy to the heart is far more common than primary
cardiac tumours.[8] The most common clinical presentation is from pericardial
effusion, tachyarrhythmias, atrioventricular block and congestive heart failure.
Tumours most likely to metastasise to the heart are malignant melanoma,
leukaemia, malignant germ cell tumours and malignant thymoma.
Although carcinoma of the lung and breast do not often metastasise to the
heart, because of the very high numbers, they account for the greatest numbers
of cardiac metastases.
Carcinoma of the lung can also cause atrial fibrillation in the absence of
metastatic spread to the heart.
Central nervous system
ECG abnormalities and rhythm disorders often occur in patients with subarach-
noid haemorrhage and in cases of ischaemic stroke, intracranial haemorrhage,
head trauma, neurosurgical procedures, acute meningitis, intracranial space-
occupying tumours and epilepsy.
New-onset atrial fibrillation has been reported in up to one third of patients with
acute stroke.
 6/9
 
Renal disease
Abnormalities of renal function may affect the heart in a number of ways:
Renal impairment may impair the clearance of drugs that are potentially car-
diotoxic, such as digoxin.
Electrolyte disturbances associated with acute kidney injury or chronic kidney
disease may cause cardiac abnormalities, particularly hypokalaemia, hyper-
kalaemia, hypercalcaemia and hypocalcaemia. Other electrolytes, including
magnesium, may also be important.
Chronic kidney disease may result in pericardial effusion.
Long-term dialysis may cause cardiomyopathy.[9]
Kidney disease may lead to hypertensive cardiac disease.
Assessment
If there is any suspicion that the heart may be involved in systemic disease, this
needs to be investigated or it may become apparent on other investigations. In ad-
dition to any other investigation for the suspected underlying disease:
Cardiovascular history and examination and clinical assessment of other sys-
tems as applicable.
Blood tests for myocardial infarction (cardiac enzymes - particularly troponins)
and/or heart failure (including brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)).
CXR may show an enlarged heart, although it may not be clear if this is due to
hypertrophy of the myocardium or dilation of the chambers. It may also indicate
heart failure.
12-lead ECG.
Echocardiography.
Other investigations may be indicated - eg, cardiac catheterisation, MRI scan,
Doppler flow studies, nuclear cardiology and other cardiac scans.