Heart failure diagnosis and investigation
Heart failure is a clinical syndrome resulting in a reduced cardiac output and/or ele-
vated intracardiac pressures at rest or during stress. characterised by:
Typical symptoms: shortness of breath, fatigue, ankle swelling.
Typical signs: tachycardia, tachypnoea, pulmonary rales, pleural effusion, raised
jugular venous pressure (JVP), peripheral oedema, hepatomegaly.
Objective evidence of a structural or functional abnormality of the heart at rest:
cardiomegaly, third heart sound, cardiac murmurs, echocardiogram abnormali-
ties, raised natriuretic peptide concentration.
The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines require that there be symp-
toms, signs and objective evidence present before a diagnosis of heart failure can
be made.[1] Heart failure has a number of different aetiologies (see 'Aetiology', be-
low) - always try to determine the cause. Heart failure should never be the only diag-
nosis, as it is a syndrome occurring as a result of other diagnostic entities.
Classification of heart failure
Acute and chronic
Heart failure has traditionally been described as acute heart failure or chronic heart
failure, but this can be confusing and should be used to describe time, rather than
severity. Acute heart failure can present as new-onset heart failure in people without
known cardiac dysfunction, or as acute decompensation of chronic heart failure.
NICE divides heart failure into two entities in this way, with separate guidelines for
acute and chronic heart failure.[2] [3] The first is essentially aimed at an acute ad-
mission in secondary care, whereas the second concentrates more on diagnosis of
the longer-standing condition in primary care and referral on to a specialist sec-
ondary care service, and the subsequent management there and follow-up in the
community. The ESC guideline addresses acute and chronic heart failure together
within one document.[1]
Ejection fraction[1] [3]
The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is the percentage of the blood in the left
ventricle which is pumped out with each heartbeat. It is measured on transthoracic
echocardiography, and also can be assessed by MRI, transoesophageal echocar-
diography and nuclear medicine scans.
Heart failure has been grouped by severity based on the measurement of left ven-
tricular ejection fraction (LVEF). This was based on the original treatment trials in
heart failure that demonstrated substantially improved outcomes in patients with
 2/12

  
LVEF above 40%. The European Society of Cardiology heart failure guideline uses the
following classification of heart failure:
Reduced LVEF (HFrEF): 40% or less; significant reduction in LV systolic function.
Mildly reduced LV systolic function (HFmrEF): LVEF between 41% and 49%.
Preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF): 50% or higher.
Heart failure is divided into:
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction : defined as heart failure with an
ejection fraction less than 40%.
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction . Usually relaxation rather than con-
traction of the left ventricle is affected, and ejection fraction is normal or at least
above 40%.
The ESC guidelines also define a heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction
(HFmrEF) of 40-49%, which they consider a grey area where normal ejection
fraction is 50 or more. The definition of normal varies somewhat between ex-
perts, but NICE and the ESC guidelines agree on the 40% cut off for reduced vs
preserved ejection fraction definitions.
This distinction is clinically important, as the two main types of heart failure are rep-
resentative of different causes, demographics and comorbidities, and most impor-
tantly treatment is different.
Other classifications
Other terms have been used in the past but are no longer in use. High vs low output
failure has been replaced by ejection fraction terms. Systolic and diastolic failure are
similarly no longer used. Classification by severity of symptoms is discussed in the
'Staging' section later, although symptom severity does not necessarily correlate
with assessment of left ventricular function.
Epidemiology[3] [4]
The prevalence of heart failure increases with age. The average age at first diagnosis
is 76 years. In the UK, the prevalence of heart failure is estimated to be about:
 3/12

  
1 in 35 people 65-74 years of age.
1 in 15 people 75-84 years of age.
Just over 1 in 7 people 85 years of age or older.
The incidence of heart failure in Europe is about 5 per 1,000 person/years in adults,
and the prevalence is 1-2% in adults (1% for those under 55 years, and more than 10%
for those aged over 70 years).
In people with heart failure, about 50% have reduced ejection fraction and 50% have
preserved or mildly reduced ejection fraction.
Heart failure accounts for about 2% of all NHS hospitalised bed-days, and 5% of all
NHS medical emergency admissions.
Aetiology
Coronary heart disease and hypertension are the most common causes of heart
failure in the UK.
Valvular heart disease:
Aortic stenosis can cause left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) due to chronic
excessive afterload.
Aortic regurgitation or mitral regurgitation, atrial septal defect (ASD), ven-
tricular septal defect (VSD) and tricuspid incompetence cause excessive
preload.
Heart failure secondary to myocardial disease:
Coronary heart disease (myocardial infarction (MI) and ischaemia, arrhyth-
mias - eg, atrial fibrillation (AF), heart block).
Hypertension (increased vascular resistance, often with LVH but preserved
ejection fraction).
Cardiomyopathies.
Drugs - eg, beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, anti-arrhythmics, cytotoxics.
Toxins - eg, alcohol, cocaine, mercury, cobalt, arsenic.
 4/12

  
Endocrine - eg, diabetes, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing's syn-
drome, adrenal insufficiency, excessive growth hormone, phaeochromocy-
toma.
Nutritional - eg, deficiencies of thiamine, selenium, carnitine, and obesity,
cachexia.
Infiltrative - eg, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, haemochromatosis, Löffler's
eosinophilia, connective tissue disease.
Infective - eg, Chagas' disease, HIV.
Arrhythmias - tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias.
Conditions where there is increased peripheral demand on the heart - this oc-
curs when cardiac output is normal or increased in the face of much increased
needs. It can occur with a normal heart but even earlier if there is heart disease.
This can be termed high-output cardiac failure. Causes include:
Anaemia.
Pregnancy.
Sepsis.
Hyperthyroidism.
Paget's disease of bone.
Arteriovenous malformations.
Beriberi.
Presentation[4]
In general, the heart fails as a whole. However, sometimes a disproportionate burden
falls on one ventricle and this influences the pattern of symptoms and signs. There is
no symptom or sign that is both sensitive and specific for chronic heart failure.[5]
Symptoms of heart failure
Patients do not necessarily have all and some may be predominant at times. In ad-
dition, patients may be depressed or complain of drug-related side-effects.
 5/12

  
Dyspnoea on exertion and fatigue (may limit exercise tolerance).
Orthopnoea (breathlessness on lying flat).
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea (PND).
Fluid retention (may cause pulmonary or peripheral oedema. If the latter, the pa-
tient may complain of weight gain, ankle swelling, or a bloating sensation).
Nocturnal cough (± pink frothy sputum) or wheeze.
Light-headedness or syncope.
Anorexia.
Signs of heart failure
There may be a tachycardia at rest, low systolic blood pressure (BP), a displaced
apex (LV dilatation) or RV heave (pulmonary hypertension), a narrow pulse pres-
sure or pulsus alternans (alternating large and small pulse pressures) and a
raised JVP.
There may be a gallop rhythm due to presence of S3 (see also the separate
Heart Auscultation article) or murmurs of mitral or aortic valve disease.
Bilateral basal end-inspiratory crackles ± wheeze ('cardiac asthma').
Tachypnoea.
Pleural effusions.
Tender hepatomegaly - pulsatile in tricuspid regurgitation, with ascites.
Often extensive peripheral oedema. There may be swollen ankles, sacral oede-
ma or ascites.
In acute failure the patient may look ill and exhausted and there may be
cyanosis.
The peak expiratory flow rate may be reduced but, if it is <150 litres/minute, suspect
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
 6/12

  
Investigations[3]
Having taken a history and performed an examination then the following investiga-
tions are recommended by NICE.
Measure NT-proBNP
A blood test to check N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) should
be done in all people with heart failure. Previous NICE guidance distinguished be-
tween management of those with a prior history of MI and those without, but updat-
ed 2018 guidelines recommend that:
All those with suspected heart failure and an NT-proBNP level >2,000 ng/L (236
pmol/L) be referred urgently, to have specialist assessment and transthoracic
echocardiography within two weeks. (This is equivalent to B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP level) >400 pg/mL (116 pmol/L) where NT-proBNP is not available.)
All those with suspected heart failure and an NT-proBNP level between 400 and
2,000 ng/L (47 to 236 pmol/L) are referred to have specialist assessment and
transthoracic echocardiography within six weeks. (This is equivalent to a BNP
level between 100-400 pg/mL (29-116 pmol/L) where NT-proBNP is not available.)
≤
If the levels are normal (NT-proBNP level <400 ng/L or BNP 100 pg/ml), heart fail-
ure is unlikely and other diagnoses should be considered. If there is still clinical
suspicion of heart failure, discuss with a specialist physician.
Note that BNP levels can be elevated in other situations than heart failure - for
example:
Left ventricular hypertrophy.
Ischaemia.
Tachycardia.
Hypoxaemia.
Renal dysfunction (eGFR <60).
Age over 70.
Liver cirrhosis.
 7/12

  
Sepsis.
COPD.
Diabetes.
Note that BNP levels can be reduced in certain circumstances such as:
Obesity.
African-Caribbean origin.
Medication - diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-II receptor blockers, beta-
blockers, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists.
ECG
Arrange an ECG in all patients with suspected heart failure. This not only identifies
potential aetiological factors (for example, myocardial infarction or arrhythmias) but
is also necessary for treatment decisions - eg, rate control and anticoagulation for
AF or pacing for bradycardia. A normal ECG makes heart failure very unlikely (sensi-
tivity 89%).[1]
Echocardiography
Following referral, all patients should have transthoracic echocardiography per-
formed within the timescale above. This identifies valve disease and ventricular dys-
function, and detects shunts.
In people presenting with new suspected acute heart failure, consider performing
transthoracic echocardiography within 48 hours of admission to guide early special-
ist management.[2]
Other tests
Consider further tests to exclude other diagnoses and to ascertain aetiology,
including:
Blood tests: FBC, U&E and eGFR, LFTs, HbA1c, lipids, TFTs; consider cardiac en-
zymes if an undiagnosed MI is possible in the preceding few days.
 8/12

  
CXR - provides supportive evidence for heart failure and helps to exclude other
potential causes of breathlessness. Typical findings in heart failure include:
Cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio >50%).
Ventricular hypertrophy.
Prominent upper lobe veins (upper lobe diversion).
Peribronchial cuffing.
Diffuse interstitial or alveolar shadowing - classical perihilar 'bat's wings' or
nodular (especially with pre-existing COPD).
Fluid in the fissures.
Pleural effusions.
Kerley B lines.
Apart from pulmonary congestion, CXR findings are only predictive of heart fail-
ure where there are co-existing typical signs and symptoms.
Urinalysis.
Lung function tests (peak flow or spirometry).
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging - the gold standard for assessing ventric-
ular volumes, mass and wall motion. It can be used with contrast to identify in-
flammation, infiltration and scarring of the myocardium. MRI or radionuclide
imaging may be useful where there was poor imaging on echocardiography.
Staging
The New York Heart Association's (NYHA) Classification of Heart Failure has provided
a clinically useful, functional classification, outlined below:[6]
Class I: no symptoms on ordinary physical activity.
Class II: slight limitation of physical activity by symptoms.
Class III: less than ordinary activity leads to symptoms.
Class IV: inability to carry out any activity without symptoms.
 9/12

  
Indications for specialist
referral[3] [4]
All those with suspected heart failure should be referred to a specialist cardiac fail-
ure multidisciplinary team. Refer for immediate assessment all those with severe
symptoms or pregnant women with suspected heart failure.
Adults with suspected heart failure should have specialist assessment and transtho-
racic echocardiography within two weeks of referral if they have a very high N-termi-
nal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level (over 2,000 ng/L), or six weeks if
they have a high NT-proBNP level (between 400 and 2,000 ng/L).[7]
Prognosis of heart
failure[4]
Prognosis is poor on the whole, with approximately 50% of people with heart fail-
ure dying within five years of diagnosis.
The mortality rate in the UK appears to be improving. The UK National Heart fail-
ure audit found the mortality of patients hospitalised with heart failure to be 9%
in 2020-21.
The prognosis for people with heart failure and preserved LV ejection fraction is a
little better than the prognosis for people with heart failure and reduced ejection
fraction. Generally, the lower the ejection fraction, the poorer the prognosis.
Other poor prognostic factors (although this does depend on the type of heart
failure) include:[8]
Increasing age.
Smoking.
Diabetes and other comorbidities (such as atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney
disease, COPD).
Obesity or low BMI.
Management of heart failure is discussed in the separate Heart Failure Management
article.