Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a congenital or acquired disorder
characterized by marked ventricular hypertrophy with diastolic dysfunction (eg,
due to valvular aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta, systemic hypertension).
Symptoms include dyspnea, chest pain, syncope, and sudden death. A systolic
murmur, increased by Valsalva maneuver, is typically present in the
hypertrophic obstructive type. Diagnosis is by echocardiography or cardiac MRI.
Treatment is with beta-blockers, verapamil, disopyramide, mavacamten, and
sometimes chemical reduction or surgical removal of outflow tract obstruction.
A cardiomyopathy is a primary disorder of the heart muscle (see also Overview of Cardiomyopathies.)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a common cause of sudden death in young athletes. It may cause
unexplained syncope and may not be diagnosed before autopsy.
Etiology of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Most cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are inherited. At least 1,500 different mutations that are
inherited in an autosomally dominant pattern have been identified; spontaneous mutations can also
occur. Prevalence is 1:200 to 1:500 (1); phenotypic expression varies markedly.
Rarely, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is acquired. It may develop in patients with acromegaly,
pheochromocytoma, or neurofibromatosis.
Pathophysiology of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
The myocardium is abnormal with cellular and myofibrillar disarray, although this finding is not specific
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
In the most common phenotype, the anterior septum and contiguous anterior free wall below the aortic
valve are markedly hypertrophied and thickened, with little or no hypertrophy of the left ventricular (LV)
posterior wall. Sometimes isolated apical hypertrophy occurs; however, virtually any asymmetric
pattern of left ventricular hypertrophy can be observed, and in a small minority of patients even
symmetric hypertrophy has been noted.
About two thirds of patients exhibit obstructive physiology at rest or during exercise. Obstruction is the
result of mechanical impedance to LV outflow during systole due to systolic anterior motion (SAM) of
the mitral valve. During SAM, the mitral valve and valve apparatus are sucked into the LV outflow tract
by a Venturi effect of high-velocity blood flow, resulting in obstruction of flow and decrease in cardiac
output. Mitral regurgitation can also occur as the result of distortion of leaflet motion by SAM of the
mitral valve. This obstruction and valvular regurgitation contribute to the development of symptoms
related to heart failure. Less commonly, midventricular hypertrophy leads to an intracavitary gradient at
the papillary muscle level, rarely resulting in increased LV wall stress and increased risk of LV apical
aneurysm.
Contractility is grossly normal, resulting in a normal ejection fraction (EF). Later, EF is elevated because
the ventricle has a small volume and empties nearly completely to maintain cardiac output.
Hypertrophy results in a stiff, noncompliant chamber (usually the left ventricle) that resists diastolic
filling, elevating end-diastolic pressure and thus increasing pulmonary venous pressure. As resistance to
filling increases, cardiac output decreases, an effect worsened by any outflow tract gradient present.
Because tachycardia allows less time for filling, symptoms tend to appear mainly during exercise or
tachyarrhythmias. (See also Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.)
Coronary blood flow may be impaired, causing angina pectoris, syncope, or arrhythmias in the absence
of epicardial coronary artery disease (CAD). Flow may be impaired because capillary density relative to
myocyte size is inadequate (capillary/myocyte imbalance) or lumen diameter of intramyocardial
coronary arteries is narrowed by intimal and medial hyperplasia and hypertrophy. A supply-demand
mismatch also may be present due to increased oxygen demand caused by the hypertrophy and
adverse loading conditions.
In some cases, myocytes gradually die, probably because capillary/myocyte imbalance causes chronic
diffuse ischemia. As myocytes die, they are replaced by diffuse fibrosis. Then, the hypertrophied
ventricle with diastolic dysfunction gradually dilates and systolic dysfunction develops.
Symptoms and Signs of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Typically, symptoms appear between ages 20 and 40 years and are exertional, but symptoms may be
highly variable. They include dyspnea, chest pain (usually resembling typical angina), palpitations, and
syncope. Because systolic function is preserved, fatigability is seldom reported. The abnormal diastolic
 2/8
 
function is responsible for most symptoms. In patients with outflow tract obstruction, differentiation of
symptoms due to the obstruction versus those caused by abnormal diastolic function can be difficult.
Syncope may occur during exertion either because outflow obstruction worsens with increased
contractility or because of ventricular or atrial arrhythmia. Syncope is a marker of increased risk of sudden
death.
Blood pressure and heart rate are usually normal, and signs of increased venous pressure are rare.
When the outflow tract is obstructed, the carotid pulse has a brisk upstroke, bifid peak, and rapid
downstroke. The apex beat may have a sustained thrust due to LV hypertrophy. A 4th heart sound (S4)
is often present and is associated with a forceful atrial contraction against a poorly compliant left
ventricle in late diastole.
In patients with the obstructive form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a systolic ejection-type murmur
that does not radiate to the neck can be heard. This murmur is heard best at the left sternal edge in the
3rd or 4th intercostal space. A mitral regurgitation murmur due to distortion of the mitral apparatus
may be heard at the apex. The left ventricular outflow ejection murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
can be increased by a Valsalva maneuver (which reduces venous return and LV diastolic volume),
measures to lower aortic pressure (eg, nitroglycerin), or a postextrasystolic contraction (which increases
the outflow tract pressure gradient). Handgrip increases aortic pressure, thereby reducing the murmur’s
intensity.
Diagnosis of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Clinical suspicion (syncope, other symptoms, or murmur)
Echocardiography and/or MRI
Diagnosis is suspected based on a typical murmur and symptoms. Suspicion is increased if the patient
has a history of unexplained syncope or a family history of unexplained sudden death. Unexplained
syncope in young athletes should always raise suspicion. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy must be
distinguished from aortic stenosis and coronary artery disease, which cause similar symptoms. Less
common infiltrative cardiac disorders such as Anderson-Fabry disease and amyloid heart disease may
mimic findings of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
ECG and 2-dimensional echocardiography and/or MRI (the best noninvasive confirmatory tests) are
done. Chest x-ray is often done but is usually normal because the ventricles are not dilated (although
the left atrium may be enlarged). Exercise testing and 24-hour ambulatory monitoring may be helpful
for patients considered at high risk, although accurately identifying such patients is difficult. Patients
with syncope or sustained arrhythmias should be evaluated as inpatients.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (Apical Variant)
The ECG usually shows voltage criteria for LV hypertrophy (eg, S wave in lead V1 plus R wave in lead V5
or V6 > 35 mm). Very deep septal Q waves in leads I, aVL, V5, and V6 are often present with asymmetric
septal hypertrophy; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy sometimes produces a QRS complex in V1 and V2,
simulating previous septal infarction. T waves are usually abnormal; the most common finding is deep
symmetric T-wave inversion in leads I, aVL, V5, and V6. ST-segment depression in the same leads is
common (particularly in the apical obliterative form). The P wave is often broad and notched in leads II,
III, and aVF, with a biphasic P wave in leads V1 and V2, indicating left atrial hypertrophy. Incidence of
preexcitation phenomenon of the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome type, which may cause palpitations,
is increased. Bundle branch block is common.
Two-dimensional Doppler echocardiography can differentiate the forms of cardiomyopathy (see figure
Forms of Cardiomyopathy) and quantify the severity of hypertrophy and degree of outflow tract
obstruction. These measurements are particularly useful for monitoring the effect of medical or surgical
treatment. Midsystolic closure of the aortic valve sometimes occurs when outflow tract obstruction is
severe. Ambulatory 24-hour monitoring is recommended during the initial evaluation and every 1 to 3
years to assess risk of sudden cardiac death and help guide treatment of arrhythmias (1).
Cardiac catheterization is usually done only when invasive therapy is considered. Usually, no significant
stenoses are present in the coronary arteries, but older patients may have coexisting coronary artery
disease.
Genetic markers do not identify high-risk individuals or influence treatment. However, genetic testing
may be of benefit in screening family members.
Diagnosis reference
1. Maron BJ, Desai MY, Nishimura RA, et al. Diagnosis and Evaluation of
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2022;79(4):372-389.
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2021.12.002
Treatment of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Beta-blockers
Rate-limiting and negative inotropic calcium channel blockers
Mavacamten
Avoidance of nitrates, diuretics, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Possibly antiarrhythmics (eg, disopyramide, amiodarone)
Possibly implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and sometimes surgery or ablative
procedures
Treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is based on the phenotype. Patients without obstruction
generally have a stable clinical course without significant symptoms, although some experience heart
failure symptoms due to diastolic dysfunction. Beta-blockers and heart rate-limiting calcium channel
blockers with a lower arterial dilation capacity (usually verapamil), alone or combined, are the
mainstays. By slowing the heart rate, they prolong the diastolic filling period, which may increase left
ventricular filling in patients with diastolic dysfunction. Long-term efficacy of such therapy, however, has
not been proven.
 5/8
 
In patients with the obstructive phenotype, in addition to attempts at improving diastolic function,
treatment is directed at reducing the outflow tract gradient. Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel
blockers (eg, verapamil, diltiazem), beta-blockers, and disopyramide reduce the outflow tract gradient
through their negative inotropic effects. Disopyramide appears to be most effective for patients with a
resting gradient whereas beta-blockers are best at blunting the gradient that occurs during exercise.
Beta-blockers are generally considered first-line treatment for patients with the obstructive phenotype;
disopyramide helps relieve symptoms for patients in whom first-line therapy with beta-blockers,
verapamil, or diltiazem has failed.
Patients who continue to experience symptoms related to significant outflow tract gradients (≥ 50 mm
Hg) despite medical therapy are candidates for invasive treatment. When done at an experienced
center, surgical myectomy has a low operative mortality with excellent outcomes, making it the
preferred therapy in such patients. Percutaneous catheter alcohol septal ablation is an alternative to
surgery in older patients and others who are at high surgical risk.
Medications that reduce preload (eg, nitrates, diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers)
decrease chamber size and worsen symptoms and signs. Vasodilators increase the outflow tract
gradient and cause a reflex tachycardia that further worsens ventricular diastolic function. Inotropic
drugs (eg, digitalis glycosides, catecholamines) worsen outflow tract obstruction, do not relieve the high
end-diastolic pressure, and may induce arrhythmias. Mavacamten, an oral cardiac myosin inhibitor that
reduces actin-myosin cross-bridge formation, relieves symptoms, reduces left ventricular outflow tract
(LVOT) obstruction, and increases exercise tolerance in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (1,
2).
If syncope or sudden cardiac arrest has occurred or if sustained ventricular arrhythmia is confirmed by
ECG or 24-hour ambulatory monitoring, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) should usually be
placed. Controversy exists regarding the need to place a defibrillator in patients without syncope,
sudden cardiac arrest, or ventricular arrhythmias. It is generally believed that ICD insertion should be
considered in patients with high-risk features (3). High-risk features include
A family history of premature sudden cardiac arrest
Left ventricular wall thickness > 3 cm
Delayed enhancement on cardiac MRI
Unexplained syncope
Survival after a cardiac arrest due to ventricular arrhythmia
Multiple burst of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT)
Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) < 50% (end-stage disease)
Left ventricular aneurysm
Myomectomy and alcohol ablation have been used to decrease outflow obstruction and relive
symptoms. There is no proven difference on mortality between these interventions, but myomectomy is
more effective for relieving obstruction and decreasing the need for repeat interventions (4).
 6/8
 
Avoidance of competitive sports was previously recommended because sudden deaths can occur
during increased exertion. Current guidelines recommend that athletes with HCM undergo
comprehensive evaluation and shared discussion of potential risk with an expert HCM specialist.
Treatment of the dilated congestive phase of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the same as that of
dilated cardiomyopathy with predominant systolic dysfunction.
Genetic counseling is appropriate for patients with asymmetric septal hypertrophy.
Prognosis for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Overall, annual mortality is about 1% for adults but is higher for children. Death is usually sudden, and
sudden death is the most common sequela; chronic heart failure occurs less often. A higher risk of
sudden cardiac death is predicted by the presence of the following risk factors:
Family history of sudden cardiac death due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac arrest,
or sustained ventricular arrhythmias
Personal history of unexplained syncope, cardiac arrest, or sustained ventricular
arrhythmias
Multiple repetitive non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (on ambulatory ECG)
Massive left-ventricular hypertrophy (thickness ≥ 30 mm), LV dysfunction (EF < 50%) , LV
apical aneurysm
Extensive and diffuse late gadolinium enhancement on MRI
Key Points
 7/8
 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is usually due to one of numerous genetic mutations that
cause various types of ventricular hypertrophy that restrict filling (ie, cause diastolic
dysfunction) and sometimes obstruct LV outflow.
Coronary blood flow may be impaired even in the absence of coronary artery
atherosclerosis because capillary density is inadequate and the intramyocardial
coronary arteries are narrowed by intimal and medial hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
At a young age, patients may have chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations, syncope, and
sometimes sudden death, typically triggered by exertion.
Echocardiography is done, but, if available, MRI best shows the abnormal myocardium.
Use beta-blockers and/or rate-limiting calcium channel blockers (usually verapamil) to
decrease myocardial contractility and slow the heart rate and thus prolong diastolic
filling and decrease outflow obstruction.
Consider mavacamten to decrease left ventricular outflow tract gradient, improve
exercise capacity, and reduce symptoms.
Avoid nitrates and other medications that decrease preload (eg, diuretics, angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers) because these decrease
left ventricular size and worsen left ventricular function.
Place an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for patients with syncope or sudden
cardiac arrest.
Do surgical myectomy or alcohol septal ablation in patients with symptoms despite
medical therapy.