Limb pain
Limb pain may affect all or part of an extremity (for joint pain, see Pain in and Around a Single Joint and
Pain in Multiple Joints). Pain may be constant or intermittent, and unrelated to motion or precipitated by
it. Accompanying symptoms and signs often suggest a source.
Etiology of Limb Pain
The most common causes of pain in a limb are also readily apparent by history.
Musculoskeletal injuries and overuse
This discussion covers extra-articular limb pain unrelated to injury or strain. Pain that is in only one joint
or in multiple joints is discussed elsewhere.
There are many causes (see table Some Causes of Nontraumatic Limb Pain) but the most common are
the following:
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT)
Cellulitis
Radiculopathy
Uncommon but serious causes that require immediate diagnosis and treatment include
Acute arterial occlusion
Deep soft-tissue infection
Acute coronary ischemia (manifesting with only referred arm pain)
TABLE
Some Causes of Nontraumatic Limb Pain
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Musculoskeletal and soft tissue
Cellulitis Focal erythema (or darker Clinical evaluation
color on dark skin),
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
warmth, tenderness,
Sometimes blood and
swelling
tissue cultures (eg, when
patients are
Sometimes fever
immunocompromised)
Deep, constant pain,
typically out of proportion
to other findings
Erythema (or darker color
on dark skin), warmth,
Deep soft-tissue infection Blood and tissue cultures
tenderness, tense swelling,
(eg, myonecrosis,
fever Radiography
necrotizing subcutaneous
infection) Sometimes crepitation, Sometimes MRI
foul discharge, bullae or
necrotic areas, signs of
systemic toxicity (eg,
delirium, tachycardia,
pallor, shock)
Deep, constant, often
nocturnal pain
Bone tenderness, fever
Radiography, MRI, and/or
Often risk factors (eg,
Osteomyelitis CT
immunocompromise,
Sometimes bone culture
parenteral illicit drug use,
known contiguous or
remote source for
infection)
Deep, constant, often
nocturnal pain
Bone tumor (primary or Radiography, MRI, and/or
metastatic) Bone tenderness CT
Often a known cancer
Vascular
Deep venous thrombosis Swelling, often warmth Ultrasound
and/or redness,
Sometimes D-dimer
sometimes venous
testing
distension
 2/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Often risk factors (eg,
hypercoagulable state,
recent surgery or
immobility, cancer)
Mild discomfort with
swelling, erythema, and
warmth of distal lower
Chronic venous stasis Clinical evaluation
extremity
Sometimes shallow
ulcerations
Sudden, severe pain
Signs of distal limb
ischemia (eg, coolness,
pallor, pulse deficits,
Acute ischemia (typically delayed capillary refill)
due to arterial embolism,
Sometimes chronic
dissection, or thrombosis
ischemic skin changes (eg,
but sometimes due to
atrophy, hair loss, pale Immediate arteriography
massive iliofemoral
color, ulceration)
venous thrombosis that
completely obstructs After several hours,
blood flow in the limb) neurologic deficits and
muscle tenderness
Sometimes known
peripheral vascular
disease
Intermittent leg pain
triggered predictably by
exertion and relieved by
rest (intermittent
Peripheral arterial claudication), sometimes Ultrasound
rest pain which may
insufficiency
Sometimes arteriography
worsen with leg elevation
Low ankle-brachial blood
pressure index, chronic
ischemic skin changes
Neurologic
 3/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Usually electrodiagnostic
Usually weakness, often
testing (electromyography
decreased reflexes
Plexopathy (brachial or
and nerve conduction
lumbar) Sometimes numbness in a velocity)
nerve plexus distribution
Sometimes MRI
Pain and paresthesias
Clinical evaluation
beginning in neck or
Sometimes,
Thoracic outlet syndrome shoulder and extending to
electrodiagnostic testing
medial aspect of arm and
and/or MRI
hand
Pain and sometimes
sensory deficits following a
dermatomal distribution
and often worsening with
Usually MRI
Radiculopathy (eg, caused
movement
by herniated Sometimes
intervertebral disk or bone Often neck or back pain electromyography and
spurs) nerve conduction velocity
Usually weakness and
diminished deep tendon
reflexes in a nerve root
distribution
Chronic, burning pain,
typically in both hands or
both feet
Clinical evaluation
Sometimes sensory
Painful polyneuropathy
Sometimes
abnormalities such as
(eg, alcoholic neuropathy) electromyography and
hypoesthesia,
nerve conduction velocity
hyperesthesia, and/or
allodynia (pain with non-
noxious stimuli)
Burning pain,
hyperesthesia, allodynia,
Complex regional pain
vasomotor abnormalities
Clinical evaluation
syndrome (CRPS)
Typically a prior injury
(may be remote)
Other
 4/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Absence of explanatory
physical findings at the
site of pain; other
ECG and serum troponin
Acute coronary ischemia suggestive findings (eg,
(causing referred arm history suggesting Sometimes stress testing
pain) coronary artery disease, or coronary angiography
sweating and/or dyspnea
occurring simultaneously
with arm pain)
Chronic pain and
tenderness along a taut
band of muscle, worsening
Myofascial pain syndrome with movement and with Clinical evaluation
pressure on a trigger point
(focal area separate from
site of pain)
Evaluation of Limb Pain
It is important to exclude acute arterial occlusion.
History
History of present illness should address the duration, intensity, location, quality, and temporal
pattern of pain. Recent injury, excessive and/or unusual use, and factors that worsen pain (eg, limb
movement, walking) and relieve pain (eg, rest, certain positions) should be noted. Any associated
neurologic symptoms (eg, numbness, paresthesias) should be identified.
Review of systems should seek symptoms of possible causes, including back or neck pain
(radiculopathy), fever (infections such as osteomyelitis, cellulitis, or deep soft-tissue infection), dyspnea
(DVT with pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction), and chest pain or sweating (myocardial
ischemia).
Past medical history should identify known risk factors, including cancer (metastatic bone tumors);
immunocompromising disorders or medications (infections); hypercoagulable states (DVT); diabetes;
peripheral vascular disease, hypercholesterolemia, and/or hypertension (acute or chronic ischemia);
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis (radiculopathy); and prior injury (complex regional pain
syndrome). Family and social history should address family history of early vascular disease and
cigarette smoking (limb or myocardial ischemia) and illicit use of parenteral drugs (infections).
Physical examination
 5/9
 
Vital signs are reviewed for fever (suggesting infection) and tachycardia and/or tachypnea (compatible
with DVT with pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, and infection with sepsis).
The painful limb is inspected for color, edema, and any skin or hair changes, and palpated for pulses,
temperature, tenderness, and crepitation (a subtle crackling sensation indicating soft-tissue gas).
Strength, sensation and deep tendon reflexes are compared between affected and unaffected sides.
Systolic blood pressure (BP) is measured in the ankle of the affected extremity and compared with
systolic BP of an arm; the ratio of the two is the ankle-brachial index.
Red flags
Sudden, severe pain
Signs of acute limb ischemia (eg, coolness, pallor, pulse deficits, delayed capillary refill)
Dyspnea, chest pain, and/or sweating
Signs of systemic toxicity (eg, delirium, tachycardia, shock, pallor)
Crepitation, tenseness, foul discharge, bullae, necrosis
Risk factors for deep venous thrombosis
Neurologic deficits
Interpretation of findings
Streptococcal Cellulitis
It can be helpful to categorize pain by acuity of symptom onset and then further narrow the differential
diagnosis based on presence or absence of findings of
Ischemia
Inflammation
Neurologic abnormalities
 6/9
 
Sudden, severe pain suggests acute ischemia or acute radiculopathy (eg, due to sudden disc
herniation). Acute ischemia causes generalized limb pain and manifests with weak or absent pulse,
delayed capillary refill (≥ 2 seconds or, with unilateral symptoms, longer than the opposite side),
coolness, and pallor; ankle-brachial index is typically < 0.3. Such vascular signs are absent with
radiculopathy, in which pain instead follows a dermatomal distribution and is often accompanied by
back or neck pain and diminished deep tendon reflexes. However, in both cases, weakness may be
present. Acute ischemia due to massive venous thrombosis (phlegmasia cerulea dolens) usually causes
edema, which is not present in ischemia due to arterial occlusion.
In subacute pain (ie, of 1 to a few days' duration), erythema and tenderness, often accompanied by
swelling, and/or warmth, suggest an inflammatory cause. If these findings are focal or circumscribed,
cellulitis is likely. Generalized, circumferential swelling is more suggestive of DVT or, much less
commonly, deep tissue infection. Patients with a deep tissue infection typically appear quite ill and may
have blisters, necrosis, or crepitation. Findings in DVT vary widely; swelling and warmth may be minimal
or absent. Neurologic findings of weakness, paresthesias, and/or sensory abnormalities suggest
radiculopathy or plexopathy. If neurologic findings follow a dermatomal pattern, radiculopathy is more
likely.
Chronic pain can be difficult to diagnose. If neurologic findings are present, causes include
radiculopathy (dermatomal distribution), plexopathy (plexus distribution), neuropathy (stocking-glove
distribution), and complex regional pain syndrome (variable distribution). Complex regional pain
syndrome should be suspected if vasomotor changes (eg, pallor, mottling, coolness) are present,
particularly in patients with previous injury to the affected extremity. Myofascial pain syndrome causes
no neurovascular abnormalities and classically manifests with a palpably tense band of muscle in the
area of pain, and pain may be reproduced by pressure on a trigger point near but not overlying the area
of pain. In patients with essentially no clinical findings, cancer and osteomyelitis should be considered,
particularly in those with risk factors.
Intermittent pain occurring consistently with a given degree of exertion (eg, whenever walking > 3
blocks) and relieved with a few minutes of rest suggests peripheral arterial disease. Such patients
typically have an ankle-brachial blood pressure (BP) index of ≤ 0.9; an index ≤ 0.4 indicates severe
disease. However, arterial stiffness can produce falsely negative ankle-brachial index values. Because
the toe arteries are less susceptible to stiffening, the toe-brachial BP index can be measured instead in
patients with suspected peripheral arterial disease and in whom the ankle arteries are likely not
compressible (eg, patients with advanced diabetes or aging). Patients with exertional symptoms and
normal or borderline ankle-brachial BP index (> 0.9 but < 1.40) should have repeat ankle-brachial BP
index measurement after exercise on a treadmill. Patients with peripheral arterial disease may have
chronic skin changes (eg, atrophy, hair loss, pale color, ulceration).
Testing
Cellulitis, myofascial pain, painful polyneuropathy, and complex regional pain syndrome can often be
diagnosed clinically. Testing (see table Some Causes of Nontraumatic Limb Pain) is usually necessary for
other suspected causes of pain.
Treatment of Limb Pain
Primary treatment is directed at the cause. Analgesics can help relieve pain.
Key Points
Acute limb ischemia should be considered in patients with sudden, severe pain.