The long QT interval syndromes
The long QT interval syndromes (LQTS) result from any congenital or acquired
disorder of cardiac ion channel function or regulation (channelopathy) that
prolongs ventricular myocyte action potential duration as reflected by
prolongation of the rate-corrected QT interval on the ECG. Patients are at risk
for torsades de pointes polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, which may cease
spontaneously or degenerate into ventricular fibrillation. Diagnosis is by clinical
criteria and ECG, sometimes with exercise and/or provocative testing.
Treatment is avoidance of triggers, beta-blockade, and sometimes an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.
Long QT interval syndromes can be acquired, congenital, or both. (For discussion of acquired causes,
see Torsades de Pointes Ventricular Tachycardia). The incidence of congenital LQTS is approximately 1
in 2000 (1) and is the cause of about 15% of cardiac arrests that are unexplained after clinical evaluation
that includes and ECG, an echocardiogram, and ruling out coronary artery disease (2).
Pathophysiology of Long QT Interval Syndromes
The congenital long QT interval syndromes result from genetic disorders of cardiac ion channel function
or regulation (channelopathies) that prolong ventricular myocyte action potential duration as reflected
by prolongation of the rate-corrected QT interval on the ECG (QTc, typically calculated using Bazett's
formula).
QT Interval Correction (EKG)
The dysfunction may involve
Loss of function of repolarizing potassium current channels OR
Gain of function of depolarizing sodium or depolarizing calcium current channels
Prolongation of action potentials increases the probability of transmembrane voltage oscillations
occurring during the depolarized myocyte action potential (early afterdepolarizations). If the action
potential durations of myocytes in a local area vary, these oscillations may reactivate neighboring
myocytes that have repolarized and thus create torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia (TdeP VT).
The risk of TdeP VT is dependent on the degree of QTc prolongation, particularly if it is > 0.50 second (1).
LQTS (particularly LQTS3) may also cause paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Predisposing factors for arrhythmia
The occurrence of TdeP VT is favored by any condition that further prolongs action potential duration,
including female sex, bradycardia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypothyroidism. Other risk
factors include slow or irregular ventricular rate, acute intracranial disasters (eg, bleeding, stroke,
traumatic brain injury), eating disorders, organophosphate poisoning, and structural heart disease
(especially acute ischemia, myocarditis, and ventricular hypertrophy). Many medications are risk factors,
particularly class Ia, Ic, and III antiarrhythmic medications, as well as other medications, including
tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines, and certain antivirals and antifungals (see CredibleMeds for
up-to-date information). Often, several of these factors are present (2).
Etiology of Long QT Interval Syndromes
Long QT interval syndromes are classified based on the specific gene that has mutated. However, a
specific genetic abnormality is identified in only 70 to 85% of cases (1); likelihood of detecting an
abnormality varies depending on clinical factors present.
More than 15 forms of LQTS have been described, but most cases fall into 3 subgroups:
Long QT syndrome type 1 (LQTS1): Loss-of-function mutation of gene KCNQ1, which
encodes an adrenergic-sensitive Kv7.1 channel responsible for the slow outward potassium
current (IKs)
Long QT syndrome type 2 (LQTS2): Loss-of-function mutation of gene KCNH2, which
encodes the hERG channel responsible for the rapid outward potassium current (IKr)
Long QT syndrome type 3 (LQTS3): Gain-of-function mutation of gene SCN5A, which encodes
the Nav1.5 channel responsible for the inward sodium current (INa).
The vast majority of cases are LQTS1, LQTS2, or LQTS3. These 3 forms are inherited as autosomal
dominant disorders with incomplete penetrance.
Rare forms of LQTS with additional clinical features have been described including Jervell and Lange
Nielsen syndrome (with congenital neural deafness), Andersen-Tawil syndrome (with period paralysis
and craniofacial dysmorphisms), and Timothy syndrome (with craniofacial dysmorphisms,
immunodeficiency, congenital heart disease, developmental delay, and syndactyly).
Overview of Long QT Syndrome
Symptoms and Signs of Long QT Interval Syndromes
The LQTS are asymptomatic unless TdeP VT occurs, which can cause palpitations, near syncope, or
syncope. Some patients experience myoclonic jerks during syncope; they may incorrectly have a
diagnosis of epilepsy pursued. Because the ventricular action potential duration decreases with
increasing heart rate, TdeP VT is often self-terminating. However, it may degenerate into ventricular
fibrillation and cause cardiac arrest and sudden death. In patients with LQTS, there is a 5-year risk of a
first episode of life-threatening arrhythmia ranging from approximately 0.3% to 17% (1). Predictors
include the following
Age
Sex
Use of beta-blocker therapy (yes or no)
Syncope (none, while not on beta-blocker therapy, or while on beta-blocker therapy)
QTc interval
Genotype (if available; higher in LQTS2 and LQTS3 than in LQTS-1)
An online risk calculator for patients who have not yet had a life-threatening arrhythmia is available.
Diagnosis of Long QT Interval Syndromes
Characteristic clinical and electrocardiographic manifestations
Sometimes exercise testing
Sometimes ambulatory ECG monitoring
Sometimes provocative testing using IV epinephrine or isoproterenol
Often genetic testing
Screening of relatives
Diagnosis should be considered in patients with unexplained cardiac arrest or syncope or a family
history of such when the affected people do not have structural heart disease. It should also be
considered in people who are discovered to have a long QT interval when ECG is done for other
reasons.
A long QT interval is diagnosed by ECG showing prolongation of the rate-corrected QT interval (QTc).
Normal QTc values are < 0.43 second for males and < 0.45 second for females and are considered
prolonged when > 0.45 second for males or > 0.47 second for females (1).
However, given the multiplicity of factors affecting the QTc, a normal QTc does not exclude the
diagnosis. Nevertheless, at the moment of torsade de pointes VT, the QTc is essentially always
prolonged.
 4/8
 
When a patient has a significantly prolonged QT interval and documented torsade de pointes VT in the
absence of other causes of a prolonged QT interval, the diagnosis of a congenital long QT interval
syndrome is established. Patients with borderline QT intervals suspected of having LQTS should have
exercise testing, because some abnormalities appear only during exercise. Ambulatory ECG monitoring
may also disclose transient ventricular repolarization abnormalities. In patients with a normal QTc
interval, provocative testing with IV isoproterenol or epinephrine may disclose a concealed long QTc and
should be considered in patients with an intermediate probability of a congenital LQTS.
Because not all patients with a long QT interval have congenital long QT syndrome and because not all
patients with a congenital long QT syndrome have a long QT interval on any given ECG, the Schwartz
score has been developed to estimate the probability of a congenital LQTS (see table Schwartz Score for
Long QT Syndrome). Probability is estimated as low, intermediate, or high based on clinical, ECG, and
exercise testing criteria, provided that the patient is not presently exposed to any environmental causes
of QT-interval prolongation. The score can be used to establish candidacy for genetic testing, which can
be time-consuming and expensive because of the multiple gene variants to be tested for. Patients with a
low probability of a congenital LQTS do not need genetic testing, but patients in whom the probability is
intermediate or high do. High-probability patients without a detected genetic abnormality may be
considered to represent one of the 15 to 30% of patients with an unidentified mutation. Intermediate-
probability patients who are gene mutation–negative are followed closely with repeated
electrocardiographic examinations including ECG, ambulatory cardiac monitoring, and exercise testing
(2, 3).
TABLE
Schwartz Score for Long QT Syndrome (LQTS)*
CRITERIA POINTS
Patient History
Syncope with stress† 2
Syncope without stress† 1
Congenital deafness 0.5
Family History
Family member with known LQTS‡ 1
Family member with unexplained
0.5
cardiac death before age 30 ‡
Electrocardiography§
QTc ≥ 480 msec 3
QTc 460-479 msec 2
QTc 450-459 msec (males only) 1
 5/8
 
CRITERIA POINTS
QTc ≥ 480 msec during 4th minute of
1
recovery from an exercise test
Torsades de pointe arrhythmia§ 2
T wave alternans 1
Notched T wave in 3 leads 1
Resting heart rate < 2nd percentile for
0.5
age
* SCORE: ≤ 1 low probability; 1.5–3 intermediate probability; ≥ 3.5 high probability
† Mutually exclusive (ie, if syncope occurs with stress, no points are given for syncope
without stress)
‡ Mutually exclusive
§ If torsades de pointe present, do not score syncope
First-degree family members of the index case should have clinical evaluation (ie, to detect
symptoms suggestive of arrhythmia) and ECG. Thereafter, the first-degree family members of any newly
identified patients undergo similar assessment (cascade screening). Genetic testing is done when the
index case has a known mutation. Exercise testing is done when the results could alter the Schwartz
score probability result.
Some forms of LQTS are more associated with certain triggers than others.
LQTS1: Physical stress, particularly swimming, or emotional stress
LQTS2: Sudden loud noises like an alarm clock
LQTS3: Sleep
Some forms of LQTS are also associated with particular ECG patterns
LQTS1: Wide T waves
LQTS2: Low voltage, notched T-waves
LQTS3: Long-ST segment with normal appearing T-waves
However, neither the triggers nor the ECG findings are very specific and should not be used to confirm
type or to direct genetic testing.
Treatment of Long QT Interval Syndromes
Treatment of any VT/VF
Alleviation of predisposing causes and triggers, especially electrolyte abnormalities and use
of certain medications
Usually beta-blockade
Sometimes mexiletine
Sometimes an ICD
Sometimes left cardiac sympathetic denervation
Details of treatment of torsade de pointes ventricular tachycardia are discussed elsewhere but include
cardioversion for torsade-induced VF and magnesium sulfate IV. Patients with frequent or long runs of
torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia may benefit from treatment to shorten the QT interval by
increasing the heart rate using temporary pacing. Unlike medication-induced acquired torsade de
pointes, the mainstay of acute IV pharmacotherapy is IV beta-blocker rather than IV isoproterenol.
Long-term treatment to prevent sudden death includes avoidance of specific triggers (including
strenuous exercise in LQTS1 and LQTS2) and QTc-prolonging conditions. When possible, clinicians
should stop any predisposing medications and prescribe alternatives (see CredibleMeds for up-to-date
information). Patients, particularly those who will not accept exercise restrictions, should be counseled
on the need for appropriate cautions (eg, availability of an automated external defibrillator during
training and competition).
Beta-blocker therapy is recommended for most patients who have LQTS with QT interval prolongation
or who are symptomatic (most effective with LQTS1 or LQTS2). When a beta-blocker is used, a long-
acting beta-blocker without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (eg, nadolol, slow-release propranolol) is
preferred. When beta-blocker therapy is ineffective at relieving symptoms, mexiletine is added (most
effective in LQTS3).
Permanent pacing to increase the basal ventricular rate and to prevent post-extrasystolic pauses may
reduce the probability of recurrent TdeP VT. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is indicated
in patients who have been resuscitated after cardiac arrest and in those who have cardiac syncope
 7/8
 
despite therapy with a beta-blocker (see table Indications for Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillators in
Ventricular Tachycardia and Ventricular Fibrillation).
Left heart (stellate ganglion) denervation may also be used (1).
Key Points
Congenital long QT interval syndromes may cause torsades de pointes ventricular
tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and sudden death.
Numerous factors, particularly use of certain medications, increase the risk of ventricular
arrhythmias.
Diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical and electrocardiographic criteria, including
exercise and sometimes provocative testing.
Genetic testing is done on selected patients.
Family members should be screened.
Long-term management includes avoidance of triggers, use of beta-blockers, mexiletine,
permanent pacing, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, or stellate ganglion
denervation.