Lymphadenopathy
Lymphadenopathy is palpable enlargement of ≥ 1 lymph nodes. Diagnosis is
clinical. Treatment is of the causative disorder.
(See also Overview of the Lymphatic System.)
Lymph nodes are present throughout the body and may be superficial or deep. Particular collections of
superficial lymph nodes are present in the neck, axillae, and inguinal region; a few small (< 1 cm) nodes
often are palpable in those areas in healthy people.
Lymphadenopathy is palpable enlargement (> 1 cm) of ≥ 1 lymph nodes; it is categorized as
Localized: When present in only 1 body area
Generalized: When present in ≥ 2 body areas
Lymphadenitis is lymphadenopathy with pain and/or signs of inflammation (eg, erythema [more subtle
on dark skin], tenderness).
Other symptoms may be present depending on the underlying disorder.
Pathophysiology of Lymphadenopathy
Some plasma and cells (eg, cancer cells, infectious microorganisms) in the interstitial space, along with
certain cellular material, antigens, and foreign particles enter lymphatic vessels, becoming lymphatic
fluid. Lymph nodes filter the lymphatic fluid on its way to the central venous circulation, removing cells
and other material. The filtering process also presents antigens to the lymphocytes contained within the
nodes. The immune response from these lymphocytes involves cellular proliferation, which can cause
the nodes to enlarge (reactive lymphadenopathy). Pathogenic microorganisms carried in the
lymphatic fluid can directly infect the nodes, causing lymphadenitis, and cancer cells may lodge in and
proliferate in the nodes.
Etiology of Lymphadenopathy
Because lymph nodes participate in the body's immune response, a large number of infectious and
inflammatory disorders and cancers are potential causes (see table Some Causes of Lymphadenopathy).
Only the more common causes are discussed here. Causes most likely vary depending on patient age,
associated findings, and risk factors, but overall the most common causes are
Idiopathic, self-limited
Upper respiratory infections (URI)
Local soft-tissue infections
The most dangerous causes are
Cancer
HIV infection
Tuberculosis (TB)
However, most cases represent benign disorders or clinically obvious local infections. Approximately 1%
of undifferentiated cases presenting for primary care involve cancer (1).
TABLE
Some Causes of Lymphadenopathy
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Cancers
Fatigue, fever, weight loss,
Leukemias (typically Complete blood count,
splenomegaly
chronic and sometimes peripheral smear, flow
With acute leukemia, often
acute lymphocytic cytometry, bone marrow
easy bruising and/or
leukemia) examination
bleeding
Painless adenopathy (local
or generalized), often
rubbery, sometimes
Lymph node biopsy and
Lymphomas
matted
flow cytometry
Often fever, night sweats,
weight loss, splenomegaly
One or several painless
Usually evaluation to
local nodes
Metastatic cancers (often
identify the primary tumor
head and neck, thyroid,
Nodes often hard,
Biopsy if primary cancer
breast, or lung)
sometimes fixed to
not found
adjacent tissue
Systemic and systemic rheumatic disorders
 2/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Tender cervical
adenopathy in children
Fever (usually > 39° C),
Kawasaki disease Clinical criteria
truncal rash, strawberry
tongue, periungual,
palmar and plantar
desquamation
Painless adenopathy (local
or generalized) Chest imaging (plain x-ray
or CT)
Often cough and/or
Sarcoidosis
dyspnea, fever, malaise, If imaging results are
muscle weakness, weight positive, node biopsy
loss, joint pains
Generalized adenopathy
Typically arthritis or
Systemic lupus Clinical criteria
arthralgias
erythematosus (SLE)
Antibody testing
Sometimes malar rash,
other skin lesions
Other systemic rheumatic
disorders (eg, juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, Kikuchi
lymphadenopathy
Vary Varies
(necrotizing histiocytic
lymphadenitis),
rheumatoid arthritis,
Sjögren syndrome)
Infections
Generalized adenopathy
HIV antibody testing
Usually fever, malaise,
HIV infection (primary rash, arthralgia
Sometimes HIV-RNA assay
infection) (if early primary infection
Often history of HIV
is suspected)
exposure or high-risk
activity
Mononucleosis Symmetric adenopathy, Heterophile antibody test
typically cervical but
 3/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
sometimes in axillae
Sometimes Epstein-Barr
and/or inguinal areas
virus serologic testing
Fever, sore throat, severe
fatigue
Often splenomegaly
Typically in adolescents or
young adults
Cervical adenopathy only
Oropharyngeal infection
(often tender)
(eg, pharyngitis, stomatitis, Clinical evaluation
Clinically apparent
dental abscess)
oropharyngeal infection
Except for secondary
syphilis, only inguinal
adenopathy (fluctuant or
draining nodes suggest
lymphogranuloma
For herpes simplex,
venereum)
Sexually transmitted culture
infections (STIs— Often urinary symptoms,
For chlamydial infections,
particularly herpes urethral or cervical
nucleic acid-based testing
simplex, chlamydial discharge
infections, and syphilis) For syphilis, serologic
Sometimes genital lesions
testing
For secondary syphilis,
often widespread
mucocutaneous lesions,
generalized
lymphadenopathy
Usually a visible local
lesion (or recent history of
Skin and soft-tissue a lesion) distal to site of
infections (eg, cellulitis, adenopathy Usually clinical evaluation
abscess, cat-scratch
Sometimes only erythema, For cat scratch disease,
disease), including direct
tenderness of an isolated serum antibody titers
lymph node infection node (often cervical)
without apparent primary
site of entry
 4/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
Bilateral, nontender
cervical or axillary
adenopathy
Sometimes a flu-like
Toxoplasmosis Serologic testing
syndrome,
hepatosplenomegaly
Often history of exposure
to cat feces
Usually cervical or
Tuberculin skin testing or
Tuberculosis supraclavicular
interferon-gamma release
(extrapulmonary adenopathy, sometimes
assay
inflamed or draining
tuberculosis—tuberculous
Usually node aspiration or
lymphadenitis) Often in patients with HIV
biopsy
infection
Cervical adenopathy with
only little or no tenderness
Upper respiratory
Clinical evaluation
infection
Sore throat, runny nose,
cough
Other infections (eg,
brucellosis,
Vary
cytomegalovirus infection,
Often risk factors (eg,
histoplasmosis, Varies
geographic location,
paracoccidioidomycosis,
exposure)
plague, rat-bite fever,
tularemia)
Other conditions
Medications such as
History of using a
allopurinol, antibiotics (eg,
causative medication
cephalosporins, penicillin,
Except for phenytoin, a
sulfonamides), atenolol,
Clinical evaluation
serum sickness-type
captopril, carbamazepine,
reaction (eg, rash, arthritis
phenytoin,
and/or arthralgias,
pyrimethamine, and
myalgia, fever)
quinidine
Silicone breast implants Localized adenopathy in Exclusion of other causes
patients with breast of adenopathy
 5/9
 
Cause Suggestive Findings Diagnostic Approach
implants
CT = computed tomography; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.
Evaluation of Lymphadenopathy
Adenopathy may be the patient's reason for presenting or be discovered during evaluation for another
complaint.
History
History of present illness should determine the location and duration of adenopathy and whether it is
accompanied by pain. Recent cutaneous injuries (particularly cat scratches and rat bites) and infections
in the area drained by affected nodes are noted.
Review of systems should seek symptoms of possible causes, including
Runny, congested nose (URI)
Sore throat (pharyngitis, mononucleosis)
Mouth, gum, or tooth pain (oral-dental infection)
Cough and/or dyspnea (sarcoidosis, lung cancer, TB, some fungal infections)
Fever, fatigue, and malaise (mononucleosis and many other infections, cancers, and
systemic rheumatic disorders)
Genital lesions or discharge (herpes simplex, chlamydia, syphilis)
Joint pain and/or swelling (systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE] or other systemic rheumatic
disorders)
Easy bleeding and/or bruising (leukemia)
Dry, irritated eyes (Sjögren syndrome)
Past medical history should identify risk factors for (or known) TB or HIV infection, and cancer
(particularly use of alcohol and/or tobacco). Patients are queried about contacts who are ill (to assess
risk of TB or viral illnesses, such as Epstein-Barr virus), sexual history (to assess risk of sexually
transmitted infections), travel history to areas of endemic infections (eg, Middle East for brucellosis,
American Southwest for plague) and possible exposures (eg, cat feces for toxoplasmosis, farm animals
for brucellosis, wild animals for tularemia). Medication history is reviewed for specific known causative
agents.
 6/9
 
Physical examination
Vital signs are reviewed for fever. Areas of particular lymph node concentration in the neck (including
occipital and supraclavicular areas), axillae, and inguinal region are palpated. Node size, tenderness, and
consistency are noted as well as whether the nodes are freely mobile or fixed to adjacent tissue.
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (Cervical Lymphadenopathy)
Skin is inspected for rash and lesions, with particular attention to areas drained by the affected nodes.
The oropharynx is inspected and palpated for signs of infection and any lesions that may be cancerous.
The thyroid gland is palpated for enlargement and nodularity. Breasts (including in males) are palpated
for lumps. Lungs are auscultated for crackles (suggesting sarcoidosis or infection). Abdomen is palpated
for hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Genitals are examined for chancres, vesicles, and other lesions,
and for urethral discharge. Joints are examined for signs of inflammation.
Red flags
Cervical or inguinal node > 2 cm or any palpable supraclavicular or axillary node regardless
of size
Node that is draining, hard, or fixed to underlying tissue
Risk factors for HIV or TB
Fever and/or weight loss
Splenomegaly
Interpretation of findings
Patients with generalized adenopathy usually have a systemic disorder. However, patients with localized
adenopathy may have a local or systemic disorder (including one that often causes generalized
adenopathy).
 7/9
 
Sometimes, history and physical examination suggest a cause (see table Some Causes of
Lymphadenopathy) and may be diagnostic in patients with a clear viral upper respiratory infection or
with local soft-tissue or dental infection. In other cases, findings (such as the red flag findings) are of
concern but do not point to a single cause.
Cervical or inguinal nodes that are hard, markedly enlarged (> 2 cm—[1]), and/or fixed to adjacent tissue
are concerning for cancer, particularly in patients who have had prolonged use of tobacco and/or
alcohol. However, any palpable supraclavicular or axillary node not ascribable to infection regardless of
size, should prompt concern about possible intrathoracic or breast cancer. Marked tenderness,
erythema, and warmth in a single enlarged node may be due to a suppurative node infection (eg, due to
staphylococcus or streptococcus).
Fever may occur with many of the infectious, malignant, and systemic rheumatic disorders.
Splenomegaly can occur with mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, leukemia, and lymphoma. Weight loss
occurs with TB and cancer. Risk factors and travel and exposure history are at best suggestive.
Finally, adenopathy can have a serious cause in patients who have no other manifestations of illness.
Testing
If a specific disorder is suspected (eg, mononucleosis in a young patient with fever, sore throat, and
splenomegaly), initial testing is directed at clinically indicated tests for that condition (see table Some
Causes of Lymphadenopathy).
If history and physical examination do not show a likely cause, further evaluation depends on the nodes
involved and the other findings present.
Patients with unexplained red flag findings and those with generalized adenopathy should have a
complete blood count (CBC) and chest radiograph. If abnormal white blood cells are seen on CBC, a
peripheral smear and flow cytometry are done to evaluate for leukemia or lymphoma. For generalized
adenopathy, most clinicians usually also do a tuberculin skin test (or interferon-gamma release assay)
and serologic tests for HIV, mononucleosis, and perhaps toxoplasmosis and syphilis. Patients with joint
symptoms or rash should have antinuclear antibody testing for systemic lupus erythematosus.
Most clinicians believe patients with newly identified localized or generalized adenopathy and no other
findings can safely be observed for 3 to 4 weeks, unless cancer is suspected. If cancer is suspected,
patients typically require computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the area
as clinically indicated and, depending on the findings, should have biopsy of the node and any abnormal
tissue. Biopsy is also considered if isolated or generalized adenopathy does not resolve in 3 to 4 weeks
(2).
Treatment of Lymphadenopathy
Primary treatment is directed at the cause; adenopathy itself is not treated.
A trial of corticosteroids is not done for adenopathy of unknown etiology because corticosteroids can
reduce adenopathy caused by leukemia and lymphoma and thus delay diagnosis, and corticosteroids
can exacerbate TB.
A trial of antibiotics is also not indicated, except when a suppurative lymph node infection is suspected.
Key Points
Most cases are idiopathic and self limited or result from clinically apparent local causes.
Initial testing should be done if there are red flag findings, if other manifestations or risk
factors suggest a specific disorder, or when generalized adenopathy has no apparent
cause.
Patients with newly identified localized or generalized lymphadenopathy and no other
diagnostic findings can be observed for 3 to 4 weeks, after which time biopsy should be
considered.