Mitral valve
The inelastic chordae tendineae are attached at one end to the papillary muscles and the other to
the valve cusps. Papillary muscles are finger like projections from the wall of the left ventricle.
Chordae tendinae from each muscle are attached to both leaflets of the mitral valve. Thus when the
ventricle contracts, the intraventricular pressure forces the valve to close, while the tendons
prevent the valve from opening in the wrong direction.
Normal physiology
During left ventricular diastole, after the pressure drops in the left ventricle due to relaxation of the
ventricular myocardium, the mitral valve opens, and blood travels from the left atrium to the left
ventricle. About 70-80% of the blood that travels across the mitral valve occurs during the early
filling phase of the left ventricle. This early filling phase is due to active relaxation of the
ventricular myocardium, causing a pressure gradient that allows a rapid flow of blood from the left
atrium, across the mitral valve. This early filling across the mitral valve is seen on doppler
echocardiography of the mitral valve as the E wave.
After the E wave, there is a period of slow filling of the ventricle.
Left atrial contraction (left atrial systole) (during left ventricular diastole) causes added blood to
flow across the mitral valve immediately before left ventricular systole. This late flow across the
open mitral valve is seen on doppler echocardiography of the mitral valve as the A wave. The late
filling of the LV contributes about 20% to the volume in the left ventricle prior to ventricular
systole, and is known as the atrial kick.
Surface anatomy
The opening and closing of the mitral valve is difficult to hear directly, but the flow of blood to the
left ventricle is most audible at the apex of the heart, and so auscultation is usually performed at
the intersection of the fifth intercostal space and the midclavicular line.
Additional images
Section of the heart Front of thorax,
showing the showing surface
ventricular septum. relations of bones,
(Bicuspid valve lungs (purple), pleura
visible at center.) (blue), and heart (red
outline). Heart valves
are labeled with "B",
"T", "A", and "P".
Related Chapters
• Anatomy of the heart
• Heart
• Heart valve
• Papillary muscle
• Pathophysiology
• Mitral valve prolapse
• Mitral regurgitation
• Mitral stenosis
• Procedures to fix the mitral valve
• Mitral valve replacement
• Mitral valve repair
• Mitral valvuloplasty