Overview of Congenital Cardiovascular Anomalies
Congenital heart disease is the most common congenital anomaly, occurring in almost 1% of live births
(1). Among birth defects, congenital heart disease is the leading cause of infant mortality.
The most common congenital heart diseases diagnosed in infancy are muscular and perimembranous
ventricular septal defects followed by secundum atrial septal defects, with a total prevalence of 48.4 in
10,000 live births (2, 3, 4). The most common cyanotic congenital heart disease is tetralogy of Fallot,
which is twice as prevalent as transposition of the great arteries (4.7 vs. 2.3/10 000 births). Overall,
bicuspid aortic valves are the most common congenital defects with a prevalence reported to be as high
as 0.5% to 2.0%.
Etiology of Congenital Heart Disease
Environmental and genetic factors contribute to the development of congenital heart disease.
Common environmental factors include maternal illness (eg, diabetes, rubella, systemic lupus
erythematosus) or maternal intake of teratogenic agents (eg, lithium, isotretinoin, antiseizure drugs).
Maternal age is a known risk factor for certain genetic conditions, especially Down syndrome, that may
include cardiac defects. It is unclear whether maternal age is an independent risk factor for congenital
heart disease. Paternal age may also be a risk factor (1).
Certain numerical chromosomal abnormalities (aneuploidies), such as trisomy 21 (Down syndrome),
trisomy 18, trisomy 13, and monosomy X (Turner syndrome), are strongly associated with congenital
heart disease. However, these abnormalities account for only 5 to 6% of patients with congenital heart
disease.
Many other cases involve subchromosomal deletions (microdeletions), subchromosomal duplications,
or single-gene mutations. Often, these mutations cause congenital syndromes affecting multiple organs
in addition to the heart. Examples include DiGeorge syndrome (microdeletion in 22q11.2) and Williams
(sometimes known as Williams-Beuren) syndrome (microdeletion in 7p11.23). Single-gene defects that
cause syndromes associated with congenital heart disease include mutations in fibrillin-1 (Marfan
syndrome), TXB5 (Holt-Oram syndrome), and PTPN11 (Noonan syndrome). Single-gene defects can also
cause isolated (ie, nonsyndromic) congenital heart defects.
No identifiable genetic etiology is detected in about 72% of patients with congenital heart disease (2,
3, 4).
The recurrence risk of congenital heart disease in a family depends on the cause. Risk is negligible in de
novo mutations, 2 to 5% in nonsyndromic multifactorial congenital heart disease, and 50% when an
autosomal dominant mutation is the cause. The identification of a bicuspid aortic valve in an individual
merits family screening in view of the reported familial prevalence of 9% (5). It is important to identify
genetic factors because more patients with congenital heart disease are surviving into adulthood and
potentially starting families.
Normal Fetal Circulation
Fetal circulation is marked by
Right-to-left shunting of blood around the unventilated lungs through a patent ductus
arteriosus (connecting the pulmonary artery to the aorta) and foramen ovale (connecting
 2/18
 
the right and left atria)
Shunting is encouraged by high pulmonary arteriolar resistance and relatively low resistance to blood
flow in the systemic (including placental) circulation. About 90 to 95% of the right heart output bypasses
the lungs and goes directly to the systemic circulation. The fetal ductus arteriosus is kept open by low
fetal systemic PaO2 (about 25 mm Hg) along with locally produced prostaglandins. The foramen ovale is
kept open by differences in atrial pressures: left atrial pressure is relatively low because little blood is
returned from the lungs, but right atrial pressure is relatively high because large volumes of blood
return from the placenta.
 3/18
 
Normal Circulation in a Fetus
In the fetus, blood entering the right side of the heart has already been oxygenated via the
placenta. Because the lungs are not ventilated, only a small amount of blood needs to go
through the pulmonary artery. Most of the blood from the right side of the heart bypasses
the lungs through the
Foramen ovale
Ductus arteriosus
Normally, these 2 structures close shortly after birth.
Red arrows represent the most highly oxygenated fetal blood (oxygen saturation ≥ 65%). Blue
arrows represent the least highly oxygenated blood (oxygen saturation ≤ 45%). Purple arrows
represent intermediate oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation 50–60%). Note that oxygen
saturation throughout is significantly lower than in postnatal life.
 4/18
 
Perinatal changes
Profound changes to this system occur after the first few breaths, resulting in
Increased pulmonary blood flow
Functional closure of the foramen ovale
Pulmonary arteriolar resistance drops acutely as a result of vasodilation caused by lung expansion,
increased PaO2, and reduced PaCO2. The elastic forces of the ribs and chest wall decrease pulmonary
interstitial pressure, further enhancing blood flow through pulmonary capillaries. Increased venous
return from the lungs raises left atrial pressure, thus reducing the pressure differential between left and
right atria; this effect contributes to the functional closure of the foramen ovale.
As pulmonary blood flow is established, venous return from the lungs increases, raising left atrial
pressure. Air breathing increases the PaO2, which constricts the umbilical arteries. Placental blood flow
is reduced or stops, reducing blood return to the right atrium. Thus, right atrial pressure decreases
 5/18
 
while left atrial pressure increases; as a result, the 2 fetal components of the interatrial septum (septum
primum and septum secundum) are pushed together, stopping flow through the foramen ovale. In
most people, the 2 septa eventually fuse and the foramen ovale ceases to exist. However, in 25% of
adults, the foramen ovale may remain patent with minimal or no residual shunting (1).
Soon after birth, systemic resistance becomes higher than pulmonary resistance, a reversal from the
fetal state. Therefore, the direction of blood flow through the patent ductus arteriosus reverses,
creating left-to-right shunting of blood (called transitional circulation). This state lasts from moments
after birth (when the pulmonary blood flow increases and functional closure of the foramen ovale
occurs) until about 24 to 72 hours of age, when the ductus arteriosus constricts. Blood entering the
ductus and its vasa vasorum from the aorta has a high PO2, which, along with alterations in
prostaglandin metabolism, leads to constriction and closure of the ductus arteriosus. Once the ductus
arteriosus closes, an adult-type circulation exists. The 2 ventricles now pump in series, and there are no
major shunts between the pulmonary and systemic circulations.
During the days immediately after birth, a stressed neonate may revert to a fetal-type circulation.
Asphyxia with hypoxia and hypercarbia causes the pulmonary arterioles to constrict and the ductus
arteriosus to dilate, reversing the processes described previously and resulting in right-to-left shunting
through the now-patent ductus arteriosus, the reopened foramen ovale, or both. Consequently, the
neonate becomes severely hypoxemic, a condition called persistent pulmonary hypertension or
persistent fetal circulation (although there is no umbilical circulation). The goal of treatment is to reverse
the conditions that caused pulmonary vasoconstriction.
Pathophysiology of Congenital Heart Anomalies
Congenital heart anomalies are classified (see table Classification of Congenital Heart Anomalies) as
Cyanotic
Acyanotic (left-to-right shunts or obstructive lesions)
The physiologic consequences of congenital heart anomalies vary greatly, ranging from a heart murmur
or discrepancy in pulses in an asymptomatic child to severe cyanosis, heart failure, or circulatory
collapse.
TABLE
Classification of Congenital Heart
Anomalies*
Classification Examples
 6/18
 
Classification Examples
Cyanotic
Tetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of the
great arteries
Tricuspid atresia
Pulmonary atresia
—
Persistent truncus
arteriosus
Total anomalous
pulmonary venous
return
Acyanotic
Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Left-to-right shunt
Patent ductus arteriosus
Atrioventricular septal
defect
Pulmonic stenosis
Aortic stenosis
Aortic coarctation
Obstructive
Hypoplastic left heart
syndrome (often also
manifests with cyanosis,
which may be mild)
* In approximate decreasing order of frequency.
Cyanotic heart anomalies
Varying amounts of deoxygenated venous blood are shunted to the left heart (right-to-left
shunt), reducing systemic arterial oxygen saturation.
If there is > 5 g/dL (> 50 g/L) of deoxygenated hemoglobin, cyanosis results. Complications of persistent
cyanosis include polycythemia, clubbing, thromboembolism (including stroke), bleeding disorders, brain
 7/18
 
abscess, and hyperuricemia. Hypercyanotic spells can occur in infants with unrepaired tetralogy of Fallot
or other complex congenital defects with dynamic subpulmonic stenosis and a ventricular defect.
Depending on the anomaly, pulmonary blood flow may be reduced, normal, or increased (often
resulting in heart failure in addition to cyanosis), resulting in cyanosis of variable severity. Heart
murmurs are variably audible and are not specific.
Left-to-right shunts
Oxygenated blood from the left heart (left atrium or left ventricle) or the aorta shunts to the
right heart (right atrium or right ventricle) or the pulmonary artery through an opening or
communication between the 2 sides.
Immediately after birth, pulmonary vascular resistance is high and flow through this communication
may be minimal or bidirectional. Within the first 24 to 48 hours of life, however, the pulmonary vascular
resistance progressively falls, at which point blood will increasingly flow from left to right. The additional
blood flow to the right side increases pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery pressure to a varying
degree. The greater the increase, the more severe the symptoms; a small left-to-right shunt typically
does not cause symptoms or signs.
High-pressure shunts (those at the ventricular or great artery level) become apparent several days to a
few weeks after birth; low-pressure shunts (atrial septal defects) become apparent considerably later. If
untreated, elevated pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery pressure may lead to pulmonary
vascular disease and eventually Eisenmenger syndrome. Large left-to-right shunts (eg, large ventricular
septal defect [VSD], patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]) cause excess pulmonary blood flow and left
ventricular volume overload, which may lead to signs of heart failure and during infancy often result in
failure to thrive. A large left-to-right shunt also leads to lower lung compliance and higher airway
resistance. These factors increase the likelihood of hospitalization in infants with respiratory syncytial
virus or other upper or lower respiratory tract infections.
Obstructive lesions
Blood flow is obstructed, causing a pressure gradient across the obstruction.
The resulting pressure overload proximal to the obstruction may cause ventricular hypertrophy and
heart failure. The most obvious manifestation is a heart murmur, which results from turbulent flow
through the obstructed (stenotic) point. Examples are congenital aortic stenosis, which accounts for 3 to
6% of congenital heart anomalies, and congenital pulmonic stenosis, which accounts for 8 to 12% (1, 2).
Heart failure
Some congenital heart anomalies (eg, bicuspid aortic valve, mild aortic stenosis) do not significantly alter
hemodynamics. Other anomalies cause pressure or volume overload, sometimes causing heart failure.
Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is insufficient to meet the body’s metabolic needs or when the
heart cannot adequately handle venous return, causing pulmonary congestion (in left ventricular
failure), edema primarily in dependent tissues and abdominal viscera (in right ventricular failure), or
both. Heart failure in infants and children has many causes other than congenital heart anomalies (see
table Common Causes of Heart Failure in Children).
 8/18
 
TABLE
Common Causes of Heart Failure in Children
Age at Onset Causes
Chronic anemia with subsequent high-
output heart failure
Large systemic arteriovenous fistulas (eg,
cerebral vein of Galen shunt)
In utero
Myocardial dysfunction secondary to
myocarditis
Sustained intrauterine tachycardia
Any of the above
Critical aortic stenosis or critical
coarctation
Ebstein anomaly with severe tricuspid
and/or pulmonic regurgitation
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Intrauterine or neonatal paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia
Metabolic disorders (eg, hypoglycemia,
Birth through first few days
hypothermia, severe metabolic acidosis)
Neonatal sepsis
Perinatal asphyxia with myocardial
damage
Severe intrauterine anemia (hydrops
fetalis)
Total anomalous pulmonary venous
return with severe obstruction (usually
infracardiac type)
Up to 1 month Any of the above
Coarctation of the aorta, with or without
associated abnormalities
Complete heart block with or without
associated structural heart anomalies
 9/18
 
Age at Onset Causes
Large left-to-right shunts in preterm
infants (eg, patent ductus arteriosus)
Transposition of the great arteries with a
large ventricular septal defect
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (right
ventricular failure)
Complete atrioventricular septal defects
Patent ductus arteriosus
Persistent truncus arteriosus
Infancy (especially 6 to 8 weeks)
Rare metabolic disorders (eg, glycogen
storage disease type II, also called
Pompe disease)
Single ventricle
Supraventricular tachycardia
Ventricular septal defect
Childhood Acute cor pulmonale (caused by upper
airway obstructions such as large tonsils)
Acute rheumatic fever with carditis
Acute severe hypertension (eg, with
acute glomerulonephritis)
Total anomalous pulmonary venous
return (unobstructed)
Bacterial endocarditis
Chronic anemia (severe)
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Iron overload due to altered iron
metabolism (hereditary
hemachromatosis) or due to frequent
transfusions (eg, for thalassemia major)
Nutritional deficiencies
Valvular heart disorders due to
congenital or acquired cardiac disease
 10/18
 
Age at Onset Causes
(eg, rheumatic fever)
Viral myocarditis
Volume overload in a noncardiac
disorder
Duct-dependent congenital heart disease
The ductus arteriosus is a normal connection between the pulmonary artery and aorta; it is necessary
for proper fetal circulation. At birth, the rise in PaO2 and decline in prostaglandin concentration cause
closure of the ductus arteriosus, typically beginning within the first 10 to 15 hours of life.
Some congenital cardiac disorders are dependent on the ductus arteriosus remaining open to maintain
systemic blood flow (eg, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, critical aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta)
or pulmonary blood flow (cyanotic lesions such as pulmonary atresia or severe tetralogy of Fallot).
Keeping the ductus arteriosus open with exogenous prostaglandin infusion is therefore vital in these
disorders prior to definitive repair (usually surgery).
Symptoms and Signs of Congenital Heart Disease
Manifestations of congenital heart diseases are varied but commonly include
Murmurs
Cyanosis
Heart failure
Diminished or nonpalpable pulses
Other physical examination abnormalities may include circulatory shock, poor perfusion, abnormal 2nd
heart sound (S2—single or widely split), systolic click, gallop, or abnormally slow, fast, or irregular
rhythm.
Murmurs
Most left-to-right shunts and obstructive lesions cause systolic murmurs. Systolic murmurs and thrills
are most prominent at the surface closest to their point of origin, making location diagnostically helpful.
Increased flow across the pulmonary or aortic valve causes a midsystolic crescendo-decrescendo
(ejection systolic) murmur. Regurgitant flow through an atrioventricular valve or flow across a
 11/18
 
ventricular septal defect causes a holosystolic (pansystolic) murmur that obscures the first heart sound
(S1) as its intensity increases.
Patent ductus arteriosus typically causes a continuous murmur that is uninterrupted by the S2 because
blood flows through the ductus during systole and diastole. This murmur is 2-toned, having a more
pronounced sound during systole (when driven by higher pressure) than during diastole.
Cyanosis
Finger Clubbing
Central cyanosis is characterized by bluish discoloration of the lips and tongue and/or nail beds; it
occurs when there is an increase in deoxygenated hemoglobin (at least 5 g/dL [50 g/L]) and implies a
low blood oxygen level (usually oxygen saturation < 85%). Perioral cyanosis and acrocyanosis (cyanosis
of the hands and feet) without lip or nail bed cyanosis is caused by peripheral vasoconstriction rather
than hypoxemia and is a common, normal finding in neonates. Older children with longstanding
cyanosis often develop clubbing of the nail beds.
Heart failure
In infants, symptoms or signs of heart failure include
Tachycardia
Tachypnea
Dyspnea during feeding
Diaphoresis, especially during feeding
Restlessness, irritability
Hepatomegaly
Failure to thrive
 12/18
 
Dyspnea during feeding causes inadequate intake and poor growth, which may be worsened by
increased metabolic demands in heart failure and frequent respiratory tract infections. In contrast to
adults and older children, most infants do not have distended neck veins and dependent edema;
however, they occasionally have edema in the periorbital area. Hepatomegaly is a particularly
prominent feature of heart failure in infants because of the distensibility of the liver capsule at this age.
Findings in older children with heart failure are similar to those in adults.
Other manifestations of heart defects
In neonates, circulatory shock may be the first manifestation of certain anomalies (eg, hypoplastic left
heart syndrome, critical aortic stenosis, interrupted aortic arch, coarctation of the aorta). Neonates
appear extremely ill with pale or cyanotic mucous membranes, cold extremities, diminished pulses, low
blood pressure, and reduced response to stimuli.
Chest pain in children is usually noncardiac. In infants, chest pain may be manifested by unexplained
marked irritability, particularly during or after feeding, and can be caused by anomalous origin of the
left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery. In older children and adolescents, chest pain due to a
cardiac etiology is usually associated with exertion and may be caused by a coronary anomaly,
pericarditis, myocarditis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or severe aortic stenosis.
Syncope, typically without warning symptoms and often in association with exertion, may occur with
certain anomalies including cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic or dilated), anomalous origin of a coronary
artery, or inherited arrhythmia syndromes (eg, long QT syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia [CPVT], Brugada syndrome). High school–age athletes are most commonly
affected.
Diagnosis of Congenital Heart Disease
Screening by pulse oximetry
Cardiac physical examination
Chest x-ray and ECG
Echocardiography
Sometimes cardiac MRI or CT angiography, cardiac catheterization with angiocardiography
When present, heart murmurs, cyanosis, abnormal pulses, or manifestations of heart failure suggest
congenital heart disease. In neonates with these findings, echocardiography is done to confirm the
diagnosis of congenital heart disease. If the only abnormality is cyanosis, methemoglobinemia also
should be ruled out.
Although echocardiography is typically diagnostic, in select cases, cardiac MRI or CT angiography may
clarify important anatomic details. Cardiac catheterization with angiocardiography is occasionally
needed to confirm the diagnosis or to assess severity of the anomaly; however, it is generally done only
for therapeutic purposes.
 13/18
 
Newborn Screening for Congenital Heart Disease
Manifestations of congenital heart disease may be subtle or absent in neonates, and failure or delay in
detecting critical congenital heart disease, particularly in the 10 to 15% of neonates who require surgical
or inpatient medical treatment in the first hours or days of life, may lead to neonatal mortality or
significant morbidity. Thus, universal screening for critical congenital heart disease using pulse oximetry
is recommended for all neonates before hospital discharge (1). The screening is done when infants are ≥
24 hours old and is considered positive if ≥ 1 of the following is present:
Any oxygen saturation measurement is < 90%.
The oxygen saturation measurements in both the right hand and foot are < 95% on 3
separate measurements taken 1 hour apart.
There is > 3% absolute difference between the oxygen saturation in the right hand
(preductal) and foot (postductal) on 3 separate, paired measurements taken 1 hour apart.
All neonates with a positive screening result should undergo a comprehensive evaluation for congenital
heart disease and other causes of hypoxemia (eg, various respiratory disorders, central nervous system
depression, sepsis) typically including a chest x-ray, ECG, echocardiography, and often blood testing.
Sensitivity of pulse oximetry screening is slightly > 75%; the congenital heart disease lesions most often
missed are left heart obstructive lesions (eg, coarctation of the aorta).
Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease
Medical stabilization of heart failure (eg, with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme
[ACE] inhibitors, beta-blockers, digoxin, spironolactone, salt restriction and, in selected
cases, supplemental oxygen or prostaglandin E1)
Surgical repair or transcatheter intervention
Treatment of heart failure varies widely depending on the etiology. Definitive therapy typically requires
correction of the underlying problem.
After medical stabilization of acute heart failure symptoms or cyanosis, most children require surgical or
transcatheter repair; the exceptions are certain ventricular septal defects that are likely to become
smaller or close with time or mild valve dysfunction. Transcatheter procedures include
Balloon atrial septostomy for palliation of severely cyanotic neonates with transposition of
the great arteries
Balloon dilation of severe aortic valve stenosis or pulmonic valve stenosis
Transcatheter closure of cardiac shunts (most often atrial septal defect and patent ductus
arteriosus)
Transcatheter placement of pulmonary valve
Balloon dilation with or without stenting of vascular stenoses, most commonly pulmonary
artery stenosis
Heart failure in neonates
Acute, severe heart failure or cyanosis during the first week of life is a medical emergency. Secure
vascular access should be established, preferably via an umbilical venous catheter.
When critical congenital heart disease is suspected or confirmed, an IV infusion of prostaglandin E1
should be started at 0.05 to 0.1 mcg/kg/minute. Keeping the ductus open is important because most
cardiac lesions manifesting at this age are ductal-dependent for either systemic blood flow (eg,
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, critical aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta) or pulmonary blood
flow (cyanotic lesions such as critical pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary atresia or severe tetralogy of
Fallot).
Mechanical ventilation is often necessary in critically ill neonates. Supplemental oxygen should be given
judiciously or even withheld because supplemental oxygen can decrease pulmonary vascular resistance,
which is harmful to infants with certain defects (eg, hypoplastic left heart syndrome).
Other therapies for neonatal heart failure include diuretics, inotropic drugs, and drugs to reduce
afterload. The diuretic furosemide is given as an initial bolus of 1 mg/kg IV and titrated based on urine
output. Infusions of the inotropes dopamine or dobutamine can support blood pressure but have the
disadvantage of increasing heart rate and afterload, thus increasing myocardial oxygen consumption.
They are infrequently used in infants with congenital heart disease. Milrinone, frequently used in
postoperative patients with congenital heart disease, is both a positive inotrope and a vasodilator.
Dopamine, dobutamine, and milrinone all have the potential to increase the risk of arrhythmias.
Nitroprusside, a pure vasodilator, may be used for postoperative hypertension. It is started at 0.3 to 0.5
mcg/kg/minute and titrated to desired effect (usual maintenance dose is about 3 mcg/kg/minute).
Heart failure in older infants and children
Therapies often include a diuretic (eg, furosemide 0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV or 1 to 3 mg/kg orally every 8 to 24
hours, titrated upward as needed) and an ACE inhibitor (eg, captopril 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg orally 3 times a
day). A potassium-sparing diuretic (eg, spironolactone 1 mg/kg orally once or twice a day, titrated up to
2 mg/kg/dose if needed) may be useful, particularly if high-dose furosemide is required. Beta-blockers
(eg, carvedilol, metoprolol) are often added for children with chronic congestive heart failure. Newer
medications used in adults for heart failure, such as sacubitril/valsartan and sodium-glucose
cotransporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, may be useful, but data are limited in the pediatric population (1).
Digoxin is used less often than in the past but may still have a role in children with heart failure who
have large left-to-right shunts and in certain postoperative patients with congenital heart disease (dose
varies by age; see table Oral Digoxin Dosage in Children). Notably, digoxin has been shown to reduce
mortality in single-ventricle patients after the Norwood procedure and before the second stage surgery
 15/18
 
(2). Use of digoxin as a front-line drug in the treatment of neonatal supraventricular tachycardia has
declined because it results in higher mortality than treatment with propranolol (3). However, if Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome is not present, it may be a useful as a primary agent if propranolol is
ineffective or as a second agent combined with propranolol or other antiarrhythmic drugs.
TABLE
Oral Digoxin Dosage in Children*
Total Digitalizing Dose†
Age Maintenance Dose ‡
(mcg/kg)
Preterm neonates 20 2.5 mcg/kg twice daily
Term neonates 30 4–5 mcg/kg twice daily
1 month–2 years 30–50 5–6 mcg/kg twice daily
2–5 years 30–40 4–5 mcg/kg twice daily
6–10 years 20–35 2.5–4 mcg/kg twice daily
> 10 years or weight >30 0.125 mg twice daily or
10–15
kg§ 0.25 mg once daily
* All doses are based on ideal body weight for children with normal renal function. The IV
dose is 75% of the oral dose.
† A digitalizing dose is now used infrequently. It is used most often when treating
arrhythmias or acute heart failure. The total digitalizing dose is usually given over 24 hours
with half of the dose given initially, followed by one fourth of the dose given twice,
separated by 8- to 12-hour intervals; ECG monitoring is necessary.
‡ The initial maintenance dose is 25% of the digitalizing dose, given in 2 divided doses.
Adjust dose based on clinical response and drug levels.
§ Not to exceed adult oral digitalizing dose of 1–1.5 mg.
Supplemental oxygen may lessen hypoxemia and alleviate respiratory distress in heart failure; when
possible, fractional inspired oxygen (FIO2) should be kept < 40% to minimize the risk of pulmonary
epithelial damage. Supplemental oxygen must be used with caution, if at all, in patients with left-to-right
shunt lesions or left heart obstructive disease because it may exacerbate pulmonary overcirculation.
In general, a healthy diet, including salt restriction, is recommended, although dietary modifications may
be needed depending on the specific disorder and manifestations. Heart failure increases metabolic
demands and the associated dyspnea makes feeding more difficult. In infants with critical congenital
 16/18
 
heart disease, particularly those with left heart obstructive lesions, feedings may be withheld to
minimize the risk of necrotizing enterocolitis. In infants with heart failure due to left-to-right-shunt
lesions, enhanced caloric content feedings are recommended; these feedings increase calories supplied
and do so with less risk of volume overload. Some children require tube feedings to maintain growth. If
these measures do not result in weight gain, surgical repair of the anomaly is indicated.
Endocarditis prophylaxis
Guidelines of the American Heart Association for prevention of endocarditis (4) state that antibiotic
prophylaxis is required for children with congenital heart disease who have the following:
Unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease (including children with palliative shunts and
conduits)
Completely repaired congenital heart disease during the first 6 months after surgery if
prosthetic material or a device was used
Repaired congenital heart disease with residual defects at or adjacent to the site of a
prosthetic patch or prosthetic device
Mechanical or bioprosthetic valve
Previous episode of endocarditis