Raynaud Phenomenon
Raynaud phenomenon, is vasospasm of parts of the hand in response to cold or
emotional stress, causing reversible discomfort and color changes (pallor,
cyanosis, erythema, or a combination) in one or more digits. Occasionally, other
acral parts (eg, nose, tongue) are affected. The condition may be primary or
secondary. Diagnosis is clinical; testing focuses on distinguishing primary from
secondary disease. Treatment of uncomplicated cases includes avoidance of
cold, biofeedback, smoking cessation, and, as needed, vasodilating calcium
channel blockers (eg, nifedipine) or other medications.
Overall prevalence is approximately 3 to 5%; women are affected more than men, and younger people
are affected more than older people (1, 2). Raynaud phenomenon is probably due to an exaggerated
alpha-2 adrenergic response that triggers vasospasm; the mechanism is not defined.
Primary Raynaud phenomenon (also called Raynaud disease) is much more common (80 to 90% of
cases) than secondary; it occurs without symptoms or signs of other disorders (3, 4). In the remaining 10
to 20% of patients with Raynaud symptoms, a causative underlying disease (eg, systemic sclerosis) will
be evident at initial presentation or diagnosed subsequently.
Secondary Raynaud phenomenon (also called Raynaud syndrome) accompanies various disorders
and conditions, mostly systemic rheumatic diseases (see table Causes of Secondary Raynaud
Phenomenon).
TABLE
Causes of Secondary Raynaud Phenomenon
Cause Examples
Systemic rheumatic diseases Mixed or undifferentiated connective
tissue disease
Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (eg,
Cause Examples
polymyositis, dermatomyositis)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Systemic sclerosis
Endocrine disorders Hypothyroidism
Cold agglutinin disease
Hematologic disorders
Polycythemia vera
Carcinoid
Neoplastic disorders
Paraneoplastic syndrome
Neurologic disorders Carpal tunnel syndrome
Frostbite
Trauma
Vibration
Vascular disorders Thoracic outlet syndrome
Beta-blockers
Cocaine
Medications and substances Ergot preparations
Nicotine
Sympathomimetic medications
Nicotine commonly contributes to secondary Raynaud phenomenon but is often overlooked. Raynaud
phenomenon may accompany migraine headaches, variant angina, and pulmonary hypertension,
suggesting that these disorders share a common vasospastic mechanism.
Symptoms and Signs of Raynaud Phenomenon
Sensations of coldness, burning pain, paresthesias, or intermittent color changes of one or more digits
are precipitated by exposure to cold, emotional stress, or vibration. All can be reversed by removing the
stimulus. Rewarming the hands accelerates restoration of normal color and sensation.
Color changes are clearly demarcated across the digit. They may be triphasic (pallor, followed by
cyanosis and after warming by erythema due to reactive hyperemia), biphasic (cyanosis, erythema), or
uniphasic (pallor or cyanosis only). Changes are often symmetric. Raynaud phenomenon does not occur
proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joints; it most commonly affects the middle 3 fingers and rarely
affects the thumb. Vasospasm may last minutes to hours but is rarely severe enough to cause tissue
loss in primary Raynaud phenomenon.
Raynaud phenomenon secondary to a systemic rheumatic disease may progress to painful digital
gangrene; Raynaud phenomenon secondary to systemic sclerosis tends to cause extremely painful,
infected ulcers on the fingertips.
Manifestations of Raynaud Phenomenon
Raynaud Phenomenon With Cyanosis
Multiple fingertips are cyanotic.
Raynaud Phenomenon With Pallor
Pallor develops irregularly in the fingers.
Raynaud Phenomenon With Digital Gangrene
Ulceration and gangrene affect the second finger in this patient who had Raynaud phenomenon secondary
to systemic sclerosis.
Diagnosis of Raynaud Phenomenon
History and physical examination
Evaluation and testing for underlying disorder
Sometimes Doppler ultrasound and laboratory testing
Diagnostic criteria for Raynaud phenomenon are based upon a history of unusual cold sensitivity,
biphasic color changes involving white and blue digits (pallor or duskiness in patients with dark-skin),
and additional history and examination-based elements (1). Acrocyanosis also causes color change of
the digits in response to cold but differs from Raynaud phenomenon in that it is persistent, not easily
reversed, and does not cause trophic changes (thin, shiny, or discolored skin; hair loss; brittle nails),
ulcers, or pain.
 4/7
 
Primary and secondary forms are distinguished clinically, supported by vascular laboratory studies and
blood testing.
Clinical findings
A thorough history and physical examination directed at identifying a causative disorder are helpful but
rarely diagnostic.
Findings suggesting primary Raynaud phenomenon are the following (1):
Age at onset < 40 years (in two-thirds of cases)
Mild symmetric attacks affecting both hands
No tissue necrosis or gangrene
Negative or low (< 1:40) antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer
No history or physical findings suggesting another cause
Findings suggesting secondary Raynaud phenomenon are the following:
Age at onset > 40 years
Severe painful attacks that may be asymmetric and unilateral
Ischemic lesions
History and findings suggesting an accompanying disorder
Laboratory testing
Vascular laboratory testing includes measuring digital pulse wave forms and pressures.
The main blood tests are to diagnose autoimmune or inflammatory diseases (eg, measurement of
erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR] or C-reactive protein, antinuclear and anti-DNA antibodies,
rheumatoid factor, anticentromere antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide [CCP] antibodies, anti-
scleroderma [SCL] 70 antibody) .
Treatment of Raynaud Phenomenon
Trigger avoidance
Smoking cessation
Calcium channel blockers or other medications
Treatment of primary Raynaud phenomenon involves avoidance of cold, smoking cessation, and, if
stress is a triggering factor, relaxation techniques (eg, biofeedback) or counseling (1, 2). Medications are
used more often than behavioral treatments because of convenience. Vasodilating long-acting
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (eg, extended-release nifedipine, amlodipine, felodipine, or
isradipine ) are most effective and typically used as first-line agents. For patients who do not tolerate
calcium channel blockers, alternative agents include topical nitrates, oral phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitors (eg, sildenafil), angiotensin II receptor blockers, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(eg, fluoxetine). Beta-blockers, clonidine, and ergot preparations are contraindicated because they
cause vasoconstriction and may trigger or worsen symptoms.
Treatment of secondary Raynaud phenomenon focuses on the underlying disorder. Calcium channel
blockers and other medications are given as above for primary Raynaud phenomenon. Antibiotics,
analgesics, and, occasionally, surgical debridement may be necessary for ischemic ulcers. Low-dose
aspirin may prevent thrombosis but theoretically may worsen vasospasm via prostaglandin inhibition.
IV prostaglandins (alprostadil, epoprostenol, iloprost) appear to be effective and may be an option for
patients with severely ischemic digits. These medications often require administration in the inpatient
setting but may be provided in an experienced outpatient center with appropriate monitoring.
Cervical or local sympathectomy is controversial; it is reserved for patients with progressive disability
unresponsive to all other measures, including treatment of underlying disorders. Sympathectomy often
abolishes the symptoms, but relief may be temporary.
Key Points
Raynaud phenomenon is reversible vasospasm of parts of the hand in response to cold
or emotional stress.
Raynaud phenomenon may be primary or secondary to another disorder, typically a
systemic rheumatic disease (eg, systemic sclerosis).
Primary Raynaud phenomenon, unlike the secondary form, rarely causes gangrene or
tissue loss.
Diagnose clinically but consider testing to diagnose a suspected cause.
Avoid cold, smoking, and any other triggers.
Give a vasodilating calcium channel blocker or other medications.