Short QT Interval Syndromes
The short QT interval syndromes (SQTS) are extremely rare congenital or very
rarely acquired disorders of cardiac ion channel function or regulation that
shorten ventricular myocyte action potential duration as reflected by
shortening of the rate-corrected QT interval on the ECG.
(See also Overview of Arrhythmias and Overview of Channelopathies.)
The cardiac ion channel dysfunction may involve
Gain of function of repolarizing potassium current channels
Loss of function of depolarizing sodium or depolarizing calcium current channels
Loss of function of the Cl/HCO exchanger
Note that the changes in gain of function of repolarizing potassium current channels or loss of function
of depolarizing sodium or depolarizing calcium current channels are the opposite of those occurring in
long QT interval syndrome.
The resultant shortening of the action potential duration is most marked in the ventricular epicardium
and may lead to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF) often leading to
sudden death. The likelihood of ventricular tachyarrhythmias increases with the degree of rate-
corrected QT interval (QTc) shortening. Some patients with SQTS are also prone to atrial fibrillation. An
overlap syndrome with the early repolarization syndrome has been reported.
Short QT interval syndromes are classified based on the specific gene that has mutated. The most
common abnormal genes include KCNH2, KCNQ1, KCNJ2, and SLC4A3.
Patients are asymptomatic unless atrial fibrillation or VT/VF occurs, which may cause palpitations, near
syncope, syncope, or cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis of Short QT Interval Syndromes
Specific clinical and electrocardiographic criteria
Genetic testing
Screening of first-degree family members
Diagnosis should be considered in patients with unexplained cardiac arrest or syncope or a family
history of such when the affected people do not have structural heart disease. It should also be
considered in people who are discovered to have a short QT interval when ECG is done for other
reasons.
Diagnosis is by ECG showing shortening of the QTc. The degree of shortening of the QTc required is
debated but ranges from < 0.30 second to ≤ 0.36 second; the longer durations may be more
appropriate when patients or family members have a known mutation, documented VT/VF, or
unexplained cardiac arrest (1). The 2017 American Heart Association/American College of
Cardiology/Heart Rhythm Society Guidelines use ≤ 0.34 second (2). This criterion is met by
approximately 5/10,000 persons < 21 years of age (3). Genetic testing has a low yield (approximately
20%) (4). Diagnostic criteria have been proposed (1, 5). Additional testing may include ambulatory
cardiac rhythm monitoring and cardiac imaging.
First-degree family members of patients should have clinical evaluation (ie, to detect symptoms
suggestive of arrhythmia) and ECG. Genetic testing of family members is done when the patient has an
identified mutation.
Treatment of Short QT Interval Syndromes
Treatment of any VT/VF
 
Sometimes quinidine
Usually an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
Treatment with quinidine (which prolongs the QT interval) has been proposed, but most patients who
have symptoms receive an ICD (1). Expert consensus is that an ICD may be considered for asymptomatic
patients with a family history of sudden death (1, 2).
