Sudden Cardiac Death in Athletes
An estimated 1 to 3/100,000 apparently healthy young athletes die suddenly during exercise. Males are
affected up to 10 times more often than females. Basketball and football players in the United States
and soccer players in Europe may be at highest risk (1).
In young athletes, sudden cardiac death has many causes (see table Some Causes of Sudden
Cardiovascular Death in Young Athletes). The most common cause of sudden cardiac death was thought
to be hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. More recent studies suggest that hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
accounts for a lower proportion of sudden cardiac deaths and that the majority of sudden cardiac
deaths occur in patients whose hearts are found to be structurally normal during autopsy (2, 3).
Commotio cordis (sudden ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation after a blow to the precordium) is a risk
in athletes with thin, compliant chest walls even when no cardiovascular disorder is present. The blow
may involve a moderate-force projectile (eg, baseball, hockey puck, lacrosse ball) or impact with another
player during a vulnerable phase of myocardial repolarization.
Other causes include inherited arrhythmia syndromes (eg, long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome).
Some young athletes die of aortic aneurysm rupture (in Marfan syndrome).
In older athletes, sudden cardiac death is typically caused by
Coronary artery disease
Occasionally, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or valvular disease is involved.
In other conditions underlying sudden death in athletes (eg, asthma, heatstroke, complications related
to use of illicit or performance-enhancing drugs), ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation is a
terminal, not a primary, event.
Symptoms and signs are those of cardiovascular collapse; diagnosis is obvious.
Immediate treatment with advanced cardiac life support is successful in < 20%; the percentage may
increase as distribution of community-based, automated external defibrillators (AEDs) expands. Studies
have demonstrated that the presence of AEDs can increase the neurologically intact survival rates to
over 80% (4). For survivors, treatment is management of the underlying condition. In some cases, an
implanted cardioverter-defibrillator may ultimately be required.
Some Causes of Sudden Cardiovascular Death in Young Athletes
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Commotio cordis
Coronary artery anomalies (eg, anomalous left main coronary artery origin,
anomalous right coronary artery origin, coronary arterial hypoplasia)
Myocarditis
Ruptured aortic aneurysm
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
Tunneled left anterior descending coronary artery
Aortic stenosis
Premature atherosclerotic coronary artery disease
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Myxomatous degeneration of mitral valve
Long QT syndrome
Brugada syndrome
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (anterograde conduction only)
Catecholaminergic polymorphic tachycardia
Right ventricular outflow tract tachycardia
Coronary vasospasm
Cardiac sarcoidosis
Cardiac trauma
Ruptured cerebral artery aneurysm
Key Points
Sudden cardiac death during exercise is rare and may be due to hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, but many patients have a structurally normal heart at autopsy
(typically younger athletes) or coronary artery disease (older athletes).