Systole (medicine)
Systole is the contraction of heart chambers, driving blood out of the
chambers. The chamber most often discussed is the left ventricle.
However, all four chambers of the heart undergo systole and diastole in a
timed fashion so that blood is propelled forward through the
cardiovascular system.
Ventricular systole
Atrial systole, which normally occurs in the late portion of ventricular diastole, causes increased
pressure in the atrium and added blood flow into the ventricles. This added blood flow is known as
atrial kick, and is absent if there is loss of normal electrical conduction in the heart, such as during
atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and complete heart block. Aortic and pulmonary valves are closed.
Mitral and tricuspid valves are open due to the increased pressure in the atria.
Ventricular
Ventricular systole is the contraction of the myocardium of the left and right ventricles. Electrical
systole of the ventricles begins at the beginning of the QRS complex on the EKG.
At the beginning of ventricular systole, the pressure in the left ventricle increases. This soon
eclipses the pressure in the left atrium, closing the mitral valve. The pressure in the left ventricle
continues to rise, until the pressure in the ventricle is greater than the pressure in the aorta. This
causes the aortic valve to open, allowing the blood to eject into the aorta, to perfuse the end organs
of the body.
Physiological mechanism
Systole (or contraction of the heart) is initiated by the electrical cells of the sinoatrial node, which
is the heart's natural pacemaker. These cells are activated spontaneously by depolarization of their
membranes beyond a certain threshold for excitation. At this point, voltage-gated calcium channels
on the cell membrane open and allow calcium ions to pass through, into the sarcoplasm, or
interior, of the muscle cell. Some calcium ions bind to receptors on the sarcoplasmic reticulum
causing an influx of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. The calcium ions bind to the troponin,
causing a conformation change, breaking the bond between the protein tropomyosin, to which the
troponin is attached, and the myosin binding sites. This allows the myosin heads to bind to the
myosin binding sites on the actin protein filament and contraction results as the myosin heads
draw the actin filaments along, are bound by ATP, causing them to release the actin, and return to
their original position, breaking down the ATP into ADP and a phosphate group. The action
potential spreads via the passage of sodium ions through the gap junctions that connect the
sarcoplasm of adjacent myocardial cells.
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) is released by the terminal boutons of depolarized sympathetic
fibres, at the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes.
Norepinephrine diffuses across the synaptic cleft binds to the β1-adrenoreceptors – G-protein
linked receptors, consisting of seven transmembrane domains – shifting their equilibrium towards
the active state. The receptor changes its conformation and mechanically activates the G-protein
which is released. The G-protein is involved in the production of cyclic adenyl monophosphate
(cAMP) from adenyl triphosphate (ATP) and this in turn activates the protein kinase (β-
adrenoreceptor kinase). β-adrenoreceptor kinase phosphorylates the calcium ion channels in the
sarcolemma, so that calcium ion influx is increased when they are activated by the appropriate
transmembrane voltage. This will of course, cause more of the calcium receptors in the
sarcoplasmic reticulum to be activated, creating a larger flow of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm.
More troponin will be bound and more myosin binding sites cleared [of tropomyosin] so that more
myosin heads can be recruited for the contraction and a greater force and speed of contraction
results.
(Phosphodiesterase catalyses the decomposition of cAMP to AMP so that it is no longer able to
activate the protein kinase. AMP will of course, go on to be phosphorylated to ATP and may be
recycled.)
Noradrenaline also affects the atrioventricular node, reducing the delay before continuing
conduction of the action potential via the bundle of His.