Tricuspid Stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) is narrowing of the tricuspid valve orifice that obstructs
blood flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. Almost all cases result
from rheumatic fever. Symptoms include a fluttering discomfort in the neck,
fatigue, cold skin, and right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort. Jugular
pulsations are prominent, and a presystolic murmur is often heard at the left
sternal edge in the fourth intercostal space and is increased during inspiration.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography. TS is usually benign, requiring no specific
treatment, but symptomatic patients may benefit from surgery.
(See also Overview of Cardiac Valvular Disorders.)
Tricuspid stenosis is almost always due to rheumatic fever; tricuspid regurgitation is almost always also
present, as is rheumatic mitral valvulopathy (usually mitral stenosis).
Rare causes of tricuspid stenosis include systemic lupus erythematosus, right atrial myxoma, congenital
malformations, and metastatic tumors.
The right atrium becomes hypertrophied and distended, and sequelae of right heart disease–induced
heart failure develop but without right ventricular (RV) dysfunction; the RV remains underfilled and
small. Uncommonly, atrial fibrillation occurs.
Symptoms and Signs of Tricuspid Stenosis
Patients with mild tricuspid stenosis have no symptoms. The only symptoms of severe tricuspid stenosis
are fluttering discomfort in the neck (due to giant a waves in the jugular pulse), fatigue and cold skin
(due to low cardiac output), and right upper quadrant abdominal discomfort (due to an enlarged liver).
The primary visible sign is a giant flickering a wave with gradual y descent in the jugular veins. Jugular
venous distention may occur, increasing with inspiration (Kussmaul sign). The face may become darker
or flushed (a purple, red or pink skin tone in patients with light skin, or a deeper skin tone in patients
with dark skin), and scalp veins may dilate when the patient is recumbent (suffusion sign). Hepatic
congestion and peripheral edema may occur.
 
Auscultation
Soft opening snap
Mid-diastolic rumble with presystolic accentuation
On auscultation, tricuspid stenosis is often inaudible but may produce a soft opening snap and a mid-
diastolic rumble with presystolic accentuation. The murmur becomes louder and longer with
maneuvers that increase venous return (exercise, inspiration, leg-raising, Müller maneuver [forced
inhalation across a closed airway]) and softer and shorter with maneuvers that decrease venous return
(standing, Valsalva maneuver).
Findings of tricuspid stenosis often coexist with those of mitral stenosis and are less prominent. The
murmurs can be distinguished clinically (see table Distinguishing the Murmurs of Tricuspid Stenosis and
Mitral Stenosis ).
Diagnosis of Tricuspid Stenosis
Echocardiography
Diagnosis of tricuspid stenosis is suspected based on history and physical examination and confirmed
by Doppler echocardiography showing an elevated pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve. Two-
dimensional echocardiography shows thickened leaflets with reduced movement and right atrial (RA)
enlargement.
Severe tricuspid stenosis is characterized by:
Mean forward gradient across the valve > 5 mm Hg (1, 2)
ECG may show RA enlargement out of proportion to RV hypertrophy and tall, peaked P waves in inferior
leads and V1.
Chest radiograph may show a dilated superior vena cava and RA enlargement, indicated by an enlarged
right heart border.
Liver enzymes are elevated because of passive hepatic congestion.
Cardiac catheterization is rarely indicated for evaluation of tricuspid stenosis. When catheterization is
indicated (eg, to evaluate coronary anatomy), findings include elevated RA pressure with a slow fall in
early diastole and a diastolic pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve.
Treatment of Tricuspid Stenosis
Diuretics and aldosterone antagonists
Rarely valve repair or replacement
Evidence to guide treatment of tricuspid stenosis is scarce. Patients with symptoms who are not
undergoing valve replacement or repair should receive a low-salt diet, diuretics, and aldosterone
antagonists.
Patients with severe tricuspid stenosis should undergo intervention if they are symptomatic or if cardiac
surgery is being performed for other reasons.
Percutaneous balloon tricuspid commissurotomy might be considered for severe TS in patients who
cannot undergo surgical repair but only if there is no accompanying tricuspid regurgitation.
Key Points
Tricuspid stenosis is almost always due to rheumatic fever; tricuspid regurgitation and
mitral stenosis are often also present.
Heart sounds include a soft opening snap and a mid-diastolic rumble with presystolic
accentuation; the murmur becomes louder and longer with maneuvers that increase
venous return (eg, exercise, inspiration, leg-raising) and softer and shorter with
maneuvers that decrease venous return (standing, Valsalva maneuver).
Treatment includes diuretics and aldosterone antagonists; surgical repair or
replacement is rarely needed.