=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "34 weeks pregnant. Heart rate of 180 - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:53.586146",
  "file_size_bytes": 11344648,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/34 weeks pregnant. Heart rate of 180 - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===
34 weeks pregnant. Heart rate of 180
Steve Smith onOctober 9, 2025
34 weeks pregnant. Heart
rate of 180
A multiparous 41 y.o. female with history of an episode Atrial
Fibrillation with Rapid Ventricular Response (AF RVR) in the
setting of pregnancy 15 years prior and recent stillbirth
presented with recurrent AF RVR in the setting of a 34 week
gestation based on bedside US.
The patient began feeling SOB with fast heart rate and
dizziness the previous evening (approximately 12 hours
prior). Since it continued, she presented to a smaller hospital,
where her EKG showed possible AF RVR with rates as high as
180 bpm, then down to 140s after metoprolol.
Her d-dimer was also elevated at nearly 2000, so she was
transferred to a tertiary center for management of AF RVR in
the setting of high risk pregnancy.
On arrival, she reported no new complaints, and stated that
she can still feel the baby moving, that she has not felt
contractions, and she has not had any leakage of fluid. She
had not sought prenatal care due to anxiety surrounding
previous pregnancy ending in stillbirth.
BP 135/107 | Pulse (!) 181 | Resp (!) 29 | SpO2 (!) 92%
 
Here is her ED ECG:
What do you think?
Narrow Complex, Fast (174), No P-waves, Irregularly Irregular
= Atrial Fibrillation with Rapid Ventricular Response (RVR).
There is no possible alternative rhythm diagnosis! There is no
evidence of ischemia.
The conventional algorithm diagnosed AF with RVR on all 3
ECGs recorded.
By the way, the PMCardio AI ECG Model also has full ECG
diagnostics, including rhythm, and has extremely high
accuracy for atrial fibrillation. The app diagnoses atrial fib
with RVR.
Diagnostic Accuracy of the PMCardio Smartphone
Application for Artificial Intelligence-based interpretation of
electrocardiograms in primary caare (AMSTELHEART-1)
Validation of an automated artificial intelligence system for
12-lead ECG interpretation
OB was present. A bedside ultrasound showed good ejection
fraction, possibly dilated RV, no B lines.
Fetal Exam showed movement and heart rate of 160.
Adenosine was given (This is a mistake. This is clearly not a
regular narrow complex tachycardia and has virtually zero
chance of converting with adenosine).
The patient became hypotensive and an arterial line was
placed.
Magnesium, and fluids were given. Metoprolol of unknown
dose was given and HR decreased to 140.
CT did not show PE.
Adenosine 12 mg was repeated.
The providers discussed other rhythm control agents, but
amiodarone and digoxin have high toxicity for the fetus, and
the patient was borderline hypotensive, so they were very
reluctant to give diltiazem.
Esmolol was attempted, with a drop of systolic BP to 40s.
As pt was now unstable, they administered synchronized
cardioversion at 200J using etomidate for sedation, with
conversion to NSR.
Learning Point:
1. This irregularly irregular rhythm is atrial fibrillation, NOT
PSVT. This ECG cannot be anything other than Atrial
fibrillation!!
1a. On very rare occasions, an irregularly irregular
narrow complex rhythm can be MAT, but that should never be
your first thought since it is so comparatively rare.
2. Adenosine does not convert Atrial fibrillation!
3. It is safe to electrically cardiovert in pregnancy (see
UpToDate article below). The first step in this case should
be electrical cardioversion!!
4. From a stroke perspective, in a patient who is not
anticoagulated, it is VERY safe to cardiovert AF RVR if the
time since onset is < 12 hours (extremely low rate of stroke —
approximately 0.2%)
5. It is even safe to cardiovert if time since onset is 12-48
hours (much less than 1% incidence of stroke).
DCCV is safe in pregnancy
Direct current cardioversion in pregnancy: a multicentre
study
From UpToDate:
Electrical cardioversion
Emergent or elective electrical cardioversion can be
performed at all stages of pregnancy [13,50,76], and should
be used for any sustained arrhythmia with hemodynamic
compromise and can be considered for drug-refractory
arrhythmias. In the third trimester, some physicians prefer to
perform electrical cardioversion under general anesthesia
and intubation, considering the more difficult airway and
increased risk of gastric aspiration during pregnancy.
Electrical cardioversion does not result in compromise of
blood flow to the fetus [76]. While there is a theoretical risk of
inducing an arrhythmia in the fetus, this risk is very small due
to the high fibrillation threshold and small amount of energy
reaching the fetus. Nonetheless, postprocedure continuous
electronic fetal heart rate monitoring is recommended
because of reported cases of emergency cesarean delivery
due to fetal arrhythmias [77].
In one multicenter study, 27 pregnant females had 29
electrical cardioversions for supraventricular arrythmias
(atrial fibrillation [44 percent], atrial flutter [30 percent], SVT
[19 percent], atrial tachycardia [7 percent]) [78]. There were
no maternal or fetal deaths. Median gestation at cardioversion
was 28 weeks, and median gestation at delivery was 35
weeks. Postprocedure fetal monitoring was undertaken
following cardioversion in nearly half the patients and in 7
percent, urgent delivery was required postcardioversion due
to fetal bradycardia.
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD
(10/9/2025):
Two aspects of todayʼs case merit special attention: i) The
rhythm diagnosis; and, ii) Treatment considerations of the
rhythm diagnosis, given the pregnant state of this patient.
= = =
The Rhythm Diagnosis:
For clarity in Figure-1 — Iʼve reproduced the
patientʼs initial ECG. There was uncertainty about the rhythm
when the patient was first seen.
That the rhythm was supraventricular and tachycardic
was obvious from the narrowQRS in all 12 leads — and
the rapidrate.
KEY Point: Although at first glance, the rhythm
in Figure-1 may look regular — it is not regular. That the
rhythm is actually irregularly irregular (with slight-but-
real variation in the R-R interval throughout the entire
long lead II rhythm strip) — can be
verified within seconds by use of calipers (To
Emphasize — With practice, the irregular irregularity of
this rhythm can be immediately
recognized without calipers, as I was able to do).
There are no P waves in any of the 12 leads.
Therefore: The finding of an irregularly irregular rhythm
with narrow QRS and no P waves — defines this rhythm
as AFib (Atrial Fibrillation), here with a rapid ventricular
response.
NOTE #1: It is common for AFib with a rapid ventricular
response to “look” regular — which may lead to
misdiagnosis of a reentry SVT rhythm (such as AVNRT
or orthodromic AVRT). While most patients tolerate IV
Adenosine — this medication is not without potential for
side effects. Given that Adenosine is not effective for
AFib — recognizing todayʼs rhythm could have avoided
the trial of Adenosine.
NOTE #2: Review of the magnified insert of lead V1 (in
the upper right corner ofFigure-1) — suggests that
there is atrial activity in this lead. But the vertical RED
lines that I have highlighted are not flutter waves. It is
common for there to be transient “organization” of AFib
wavelets — and when this happens, you may see atrial
deflections that almost look regular in lead V1 (which is
the closest lead for recording atrial activity).
But AFlutter (Atrial Flutter) is characterized
by regular atrial activity, that in a patient not on
antiarrhythmic medication — typically manifests an atrial
rate range between ~250-350/minute.Therefore — the
irregularity of the atrial activity in Figure-1, which at
times far exceeds 300/minute rules out AFlutter as the
rhythm diagnosis.
Treatment Considerations of AFib in
a Pregnant Patient:
My review of AFib Treatment during Pregnancy encompassed
the following publications: Tamirisa et al (J Am Coll Cardiol
EP 1:120-135, 2022) — Cacciotti and Passaseo ( J Atr Fib
3(3):295, 2010) — and — Youssef ( Eur Soc Card 15(17),
2019):
Overall — AFib is not a common complication of normal
pregnancy. That said, I found it difficult to estimate the
prevalence of this arrhythmia — as frequency estimates
will depend on multiple factors including age and health
status of the patient, and presence of precipitating
factors.
There are additional complicating factors in todayʼs
case. These include the patientʼs age (41 years old) and
multiparous status (G8P6) — with lack of prenatal care
(because of patient anxiety resulting from the previous
pregnancy ending in stillbirth). Estimated gestation of
this current pregnancy = 34 weeks. Of note — this
patient had a previous episode of AFib in 2009 during
one of her earlier pregnancies!
= = =
Regarding Treatment:
First priority (as for any patient with new, rapid AFib) —
is to ensure hemodynamic stability. If/as needed
— electrical cardioversion appears to be safe at all
stages of pregnancy. (During and after electrical
cardioversion — fetal monitoring is advised, given the
risk of fetal arrhythmias).
Look for Potential Precipitating Factors — which is
critical, since if an underlying cause of AFib is present —
this will greatly affect treatment decisions (Rule out
hyperthyroidism, alcohol use, cocaine or other illicit drug
use, sympathomimetic or other stimulant medication,
electrolyte disturbance — adult congenital heart disease
— rheumatic heart disease — peripartum
cardiomyopathy — or other form of underlying heart
disease) ==> An Echo, TSH, CBC, electrolytes, etc. — all
part of the immediate work-up.
Medications for Rate Control — Beta-blockers are
recommended as 1st-line for AFib rate control. Digoxin
has a long history of being safe in pregnancy (assuming
no preexcitation). Verapamil is a 2nd-line agent (and is
favored over Diltiazem). And, if rate control with
hemodynamic stability can be achieved — it may be
reasonable to hold off decision of cardioversion, given a
high percentage of patients who spontaneously convert
to sinus rhythm within the first 24 hours of
hospitalization.
Amiodarone — should not be used in pregnancy
(significant adverse effects).
NOTE: Iʼll recommend the above reference by Tamirisa et
al — as this is a 2022 State of the Art Review by JACC
on Arrhythmias in Pregnancy. This article contains
detailed reference tables of specific drugs and treatments
for the various arrhythmias during pregnancy.