=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "36 year old with chest pain after chest wall surgery - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:56.577204",
  "file_size_bytes": 10662256,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/36 year old with chest pain after chest wall surgery - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Steve Smith onJune 10, 2025
36 year old with chest pain
after chest wall surgery
Recent chest surgery. Had been to surgeon’s office complaining of chest pain.
Assumed to be post-surgical.
SOB with pulmonary edema.
acute hypoxic resp failure with “severe pressure on chest” put on BiPAP
she is concerned about an increase in fluid accumulation, as she is experiencing
chest pain and shortness of breath. A few days ago, she had some shortness of
breath, but her surgeon was not concerned at that time. However, today she
describes a sensation of “an elephant sitting on her chest.”
Cardiac ultrasound showed a possible decreased function, IVC without respiratory
variation, and B-lines at the lung bases bilaterally. Patient’s troponin returned
significantly elevated at 10,216.
Patient having significant increased work of breathing and given B-lines on
cardiac ultrasound, she was started on BiPAP for respiratory support.
36 year-old who presents with chest pain. She underwent surgery to her chest
three weeks ago on her chest, breast reduction, now she is concerned about an
increase in fluid accumulation as she is experiencing chest pain and shortness of
breath a few days ago, she had shortness of breath and surgeon was not
concerned. However, today she describes feeling of an elephant sitting on her
 
chest. She has significant family history of cardiac issues. Her first troponin was
10,216 and Rose to 10,655 and then dropped five hours later to 7459.

 1/9
What do you think?
Before knowing anything about the case, I saw and interpreted this on our EKG
system as “Subacute Anterior OMI in the setting of Left Bundle Branch Block.”
Here is the PMCardio AI ECG Model’s diagnosis:
Notice that she also tells us that the Ejection Fraction (LVEF) is less than 40%.
This is another great feature of this model.
Abstract 4141318: AI-Powered Smartphone Application for Detection of Left Ventricular Systolic
Dysfunction using 12-Lead ECG
Here is the explainability heat map :
 2/9
The angiogram showed no coronary disease. Here is the post
angio ECG at 5 hours after the first:
Here is the troponin profile over 60 hours (most recent on the left, initial on the
right):
Cardiac MRI
Dilated left ventricular size with moderately reduced left ventricular
systolic function, calculated EF 38%.
Prolonged native T1, T2, ECV without LGE suggests myocardial edema +
inflammatory cardiomyopathy without fibrosis.
Diffuse pericardial enhancement noted, consider pericarditis.
Discussion:
Patient is a 36 year old with a history of hypothyroidism and recent bilateral
breast reduction who was admitted to the MICU for acute hypoxic respiratory
failure with acute pulmonary edema and new reduced EF30%. Her respiratory
failure has improved with diuresis.
CMRI is consistent with myopericarditis. Etiology is unknown at this point. Viral
workup was negative, but need to pursue additional workup for her severe acute
inflammatory myopericarditis. Starting valsartan for afterload reduction and will
titrate. Continue telemetry and possible limited TTE to follow up LV function
 3/9
appropriate in 4 – 6 days or sooner with unexplained change in clinical status.
Pain control appears to be improving. Continue present pain management.
Recommendations:
1.
1.Acute hypoxic respiratory failure, improving, secondary to
myocarditis
1.
a.Continue to manage pulmonary edema and other causes of respiratory
failure
2.
b.Continue diuresis with IV lasix
1.
i.Active diuresis until patient is off O2 and is comfortable – would attempt
to estimate volume status and verify patient is no longer clinically
hypervolemic)
2.
ii.Monitor with BMP for renal function and contraction alkalosis
1.
c.Continuous telemetry, strict Is/Os, daily weights
1.
2.Acute inflammatory myopericarditis
1.
a.Etiology: Recommend autoimmune/additional laboratory (HIV, ANA,
autoimmune, etc) evaluation
2.
b.Rheumatological evaluation consultation to exclude autoimmune
conditions
3.
c.cardiomyopathy/afterload: Start valsartan 20 mg BID
4.
d.Close monitoring on telemetry for arrhythmias
5.
e.Pain: Continue NSAID’s and colchicine
1.
i.Additional pain management per primary
echo:
Moderately decreased left ventricular systolic function with an estimated
EF of 30%.
Diffuse hypokinesis of the mid and apical segments.
echo 9 days later:
LV systolic dysfunction.
The estimated left ventricular ejection fraction is 40 %.
No regional left ventricular wall motion abnormality.
Normal right ventricular size and function.
 4/9
Steve Smith onJune 10, 2025
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
Interns are not (yet) 60-something with h/o
poisoned by the Coronary Bypass has
STEMI/NSTEMI acute chest pain
paradigm
