=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "4 patients with chest pain, LVH, and elevated troponin_ which has Occlusion MI_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:38:02.997731",
  "file_size_bytes": 18080720,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/4 patients with chest pain, LVH, and elevated troponin_ which has Occlusion MI_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

4 patients with chest pain, LVH, and elevated troponin: which has Occlusion MI?
Jesse McLaren onDecember 4, 2025
4 patients with chest pain,
LVH, and elevated troponin:
which has Occlusion MI?
Written by Jesse McLaren
Four patients presented with chest pain, an ECG showing
LVH, and an elevated troponin. Which patient has an acute
coronary occlusion?
Patient 1: 50 year old, no past medical history, with chest pain
that began on exertion but continues, and feels like heartburn
Patient 2: Prehospital ECG on a 55 year old with no past
medical history, with exertional chest pain and syncope, EMS
Patient 3: 60 year old, history of hypertension, with one week
of chest pain and shortness of breath on exertion
Patient 4: 55 year old, no past medical history, with 3 days of
exertional chest pain
LVH: STEMI vs OMI paradigms
LVH causes secondary ST/T changes that are discordant and
proportional to the QRS, which can mimic STEMI and Wellens
syndrome. But because STEMI criteria measure ST segment
elevation in isolation (ignoring ECG principles of totality and
proportionality), there is no way to differentiate LVH with vs
without acute coronary occlusion. So STEMI is defined as ST
elevation in the absence of LVH. But this creates an obvious
diagnostic dilemma of how to identify acute coronary
occlusion in the presence of LVH. This leads to false positive
STEMI leading to unnecessary cath lab activation (especially
with prehospital ECG machines that truncate voltages), and
false negative STEMI with delayed reperfusion. This is
compounded by discharge diagnosis of “STEMI” vs “NSTEMI”
that reflects time to treatment more than STEMI criteria.
(Alencar, Meyers, Frick, McLaren, Smith. Door-to-balloon
time outperforms ST-segment elevation in predicting the
STEMI vs NSTEMI final diagnosis. J Clin Med 2025)
Armstrong proposed that STE/RS>25% could identify LVH +
STEMI, but in leads with large S waves this requires a massive
amount of ST elevation and will miss subtle occlusions. (See
Dr. Smithʼs post which shows the fatal flaws of the Armstrong
study). The initial troponin is often not helpful in this dilemma,
because it can be falsely reassuring in acute coronary
occlusion, or elevated from hypertensive heart disease in the
absence of acute coronary occlusion. But using totality and
proportionality, the Queen of Hearts has been trained to
differentiate LVH with vs without OMI, which can help reduce
false positive STEMI activations and identify LVH + OMI. Letʼs
see how patients were managed, and how the Queen
performed
Patient 1: 50 year old, no past medical history, with chest pain
that began on exertion but continues, and feels like heartburn
PMcardio for Individuals now includes the latest Queen of
Hearts model, AI explainability (blue heatmaps), and %LV
Ejection Fraction. 
CE-certified for marketing in the European Union and the
United Kingdom. PMcardio technology has not yet been
cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
clinical use in the USA.
Back to Patient 1:
Thereʼs LVH with an S wave in V2 of 35, which would require
9mm of ST elevation to meet Armstrong criteria.
Smith: Unlike the Smith criteria for LBBB, the Armstrong
“criteria” for LVH were developed with a very poor
methodology and are very INsensitive (not sensitive
enough). In this case, their 25% rule works for lead V3 (3/11 =
27%), and the rule requires only one lead to be more than
25%.
Queen of Hearts identified LAD OMI with ECG signs of
reperfusion, but clinically the patient still had pain at the time
of the ECG. The ECG was repeated 15 minutes later, when the
patient reported reduction but still ongoing pain
Less STE in V2 but also less reperfusion in V3, and greater
inferolateral STD.
Smith: in this ECG, there is no lead that meets the 25% rule.
V2 is 2/13 = 15.4% V3 is 4/25 = 16%. My anecdotal rule for LAD
OMI in the setting of LVH (deep S-wave in V1-V3-4) is that any STE
more than 15% is very suspicious.
Smith continues: I have tried to study this topic, but it is very
difficult because it is very hard to find cases of LVH, as
manifested by deep S-waves in V1 to V3-4. Such cases are
very uncommon. Why are they uncommon? I believe, based
on anecdotal evidence, that they are uncommon because
when a patient has pre-existing ECG LVH with deep S-waves,
LAD occlusion obliterates the S-wave voltage, similar to
terminal QRS distortion in patients with normal voltage.
Queen now calls this OMI:
Cath lab was activated: 100% mid LAD occlusion, with RCA
CTO and 80% circumflex stenosis. LAD stented. First troponin
I was 2,000 ng/L and peak 10,000ng/L. Discharge ECG
showed reperfusion T wave inversion:
Discharge diagnosis was “STEMI” because of rapid
reperfusion, even though no ECG had a final interpretation of
STEMI, because STEMI criteria cannot be applied in the
presence of LVH.
Smith: only the most academic of physicians are aware that
the “STEMI millimeter criteria” exclude LVH. That is fine with
me.
The Queen of Hearts knows when the ST Elevation of LVH is
NOT due to OMI. In our recent study from JACC:
Cardiovascular Interventions, AI-Enabled ECG Analysis
Improves Diagnostic Accuracy and Reduces False STEMI
Activations: A Multicenter U.S. Registry, she decreased
false positive activations in LVH by 91%!! (from 44 to 4).
Patient 2: 55 year old, no past medical history, with exertional
chest pain and syncope, EMS Code STEMI based on the
prehospital ECG.
Thereʼs voltage cutoff, which is very common in prehospital
ECGs and this makes it difficult to assess proportionality, but
thereʼs overlapping voltages in V4-5 and the morphology of
ST segments is asymmetric. Despite the voltage cutoff the
Queen finds no signs of OMI, but with low confidence.
The ECG was repeated on arrival, revealing the full voltages,
and now the Queen is confident there are no signs of OMI on
the ECG
Cath lab was canceled and the patient was sent to the
emergency department for assessment. Troponin rose from
30 to 55 ng/L, the patient was admitted as NSTEMI.
Angiogram showed minimal coronary artery disease and echo
showed severe aortic stenosis (explaining the exertional chest
pain and syncope), treated with aortic valve replacement.
Patient 3: 60 year old, history of hypertension, with one week
of chest pain and shortness of breath on exertion
There are large and overlapping voltages, with discordant and
proportional ST/T waves secondary to LVH. Cath lab was
activated by the emergency physician but canceled by
cardiology. Serial troponins were stable at 17ng/L (normal <16
in females) and echo diagnosed hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
Patient 4: 55 year old, no past medical history, with 3 days
exertional chest pain
Thereʼs minimal LVH criteria, making the biphasic T waves
V2-4 concerning for primary ischemic changes from
reperfusion (rather than secondary to LVH), identified by the
Queen. Wellens syndrome requires resolution of ischemic
symptoms and intact R waves (ie reperfusion before a major
infarct); but V4 has lost most of its R wave, and when the first
troponin returned at 8,000ng/L the nursing notes documented
the patient still had chest pain.
But the patient was admitted as ‘high risk NSTEMIʼ, and after
troponin rose to 12,000 two hours later the patient was taken
to cath lab. Door-to-cath was 5hr40 minutes. There was
100% mid LAD occlusion, and peak troponin was 30,000
ng/L, with EF 48%. But because the patient was admitted as
NSTEMI with delayed reperfusion, the discharge diagnosis
remained NSTEMI despite a 100% occlusion. Next day ECG
showed more obvious reperfusion T wave inversion:
–
So four patients with chest pain, LVH on ECG and elevated
troponin. How can we identify which had acute coronary
occlusion:
1. STEMI criteria: cannot be applied, so only 1 had a final
interpretation of “STEMI” even though two had OMI.
Technically, that one with STEMI was a STEMI(-) OMI,
but had a final diagnosis of STEMI because there was a
short door to balloon time.
2. STEMI paradigm: in practice this led to one true positive
STEMI activation, two false positive activations that were
cancelled, and one false negative STEMI with delayed
reperfusion. The true positive (patient 1) and false
negative STEMI (patient 4) had the same angiographic
finding of a 100% mid LAD occlusion, but the former had
a discharge diagnosis of “STEMI” because of rapid
reperfusion, while the latter had a discharge diagnosis of
“NSTEMI” because of delayed reperfusion.
3. OMI paradigm + AI: the Queen of Hearts, trained to
interpret ECGs using totality and proportionality,
accurately differentiated LVH with OMI vs LVH without.
Take away
1. STEMI is defined as STE in the absence of LVH, so these
criteria cannot differentiate LVH with or without OMI
2. The first troponin canʼt differentiate OMI from
hypertensive heart disease
3. LVH causes secondary, discordant and proportional ST/T
changes – so using totality and proportionality can
differentiate secondary repolarization changes from
superimposed primary ischemic changes
4. Queen of Hearts has been trained to identify LVH +/-
OMI, which can reduce false positive activations and
identify subtle occlusions
5. Reperfusion requires both clinical and ECG evidence:
resolved ischemic symptoms but ongoing ECG signs of
occlusion, or reperfusion TWI with ongoing ischemic
symptoms indicates ongoing occlusion
6. Discharge diagnoses should be based on OMI vs NOMI
(patient outcome), not STEMI vs NSTEMI (time to
treatment)
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER
Excellent and insightful post by Dr. McLaren that proves its
premise: Diagnosis of acute OMI ( = acute coronary
occlusion) can be extremely difficult when there is marked
LVH.
The diagnosis of acute OMI with marked LVH becomes
even more difficult — when there is also another form
of significant heart disease. In such cases — deciding
if to perform cardiac cath (and if so — then when to do
so) becomes truly challenging.
CONFESSION:I had trouble interpreting these 4 initial
tracings.
Even when I immediately recognized in Patient #2 that
QRS amplitudes were cut off in the pre-hospital initial
tracing — I knew that Iʼd still be left with having to decide
IF the very peaked anterior T waves were proportional to
however deep the anterior S waves were — and even if
so — still wondering what this example of marked LVH
might be hiding within those huge QRST complexes.
My “Take coronary occlusion on the basis of the initial ECG alone;
— and, ii) Of great assistance in these problematic
cases can be finding a prior ECG — and/or repeating
the ECG in short order — serial Troponins — eliciting a
more in-depth history — and especially bedside Echo
(optimally done during chest pain— as this affords the
greatest chance of finding a localizing wall motion
abnormality).
Applying my “Take these symptoms may clearly be associated with
underlying coronary disease — they are less of a history
of an acute event. Cardiac auscultation may have
provided another clue (albeit the clinical reality that
loudness and harshness of an AS murmur is not always
indication of AS severity — and the murmur may be
surprisingly “quiet” sometimes with severe AS in
patients with reduced cardiac output). But higher-quality
Echo would doubtless be suggestive of severe AS.
In Patient #3 (who was found to have HCM =
Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy) — Echo is absolutely
diagnostic of HCM. This is fortunate — since although
the ECG in most patients with HCM is not “normal”, as
per My Comment in the October 28, 2023 post — ECG
findings in patients with HCM are most often nonspecific
(and non-diagnostic).
In Patient #4 (who was in the midst of an extensive
anterior infarction from acute LAD occlusion) — the
initial Troponin = 8,000 ng/L immediately confirmed that
the subtle terminal T wave inversions in leads V1-thru-V4
were “real” and given still ongoing CP, indicative of the
ongoing extensive infarction.
The 2 ECGs in Patient #1:
In Figure-1, to facilitate comparison between the initial and
repeat ECGs from Patient #1 — Iʼve placed these 2 tracings
together.
These 2 ECGs from Patient #1 illustrate that despite
marked LVH — comparison with either a prior tracing or
with a repeat ECG may show suspicious differences
suggestive of an acute process.
Confession: When I first looked separately at the initial
ECG — and then at the repeat ECG — I did not
appreciate the important differences between these 2
tracings. This emphasizes the importance of lead-to-
lead comparison, without which it is too easy to
overlook subtle-but-important changes.
Note that there is a difference in the frontal plane axis
between the 2 ECGs in Figure-1( = the QRS is small, but
all upright in lead I in the initial ECG — but almost
isoelectric in lead I of the repeat tracing). That said,
while true that a change in frontal plane axis may
produce some change in limb lead ST-T wave
appearance — I thought the difference between the
more peaked T waves (inverted in the inferior leads and
upright in lead aVL) with minimal ST segment deviation
— was clearly different than the increase in the amount
of ST segment deviation and the change in ST-T wave
shape evident in the repeat tracing.
Similarly, in the chest leads — the depth of T wave
inversion in leads V3,V4 was much greater in the initial
ECG than in the repeat tracing. At the same time — the
amount of J-point ST depression in leads V5,V6 is
clearly greater in the repeat tracing.
Bottom Line: In this patient reporting a change
(reduction) in CP severity — I interpreted the above
differences in ST-T wave morphology in at least 8/12
leads as indicative of “dynamic” ST-T wave changes —
with need for prompt cath that confirmed acute LAD
occlusion.
Jesse McLaren onDecember 4, 2025
LVH AND OMI QUEEN KNOWS FALSE POSITIVE
