=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "46 year old with chest pain develops a wide complex rhythm - see many examples - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:21.903398",
  "file_size_bytes": 25441294,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/46 year old with chest pain develops a wide complex rhythm - see many examples - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===
46 year old with chest pain develops a wide complex rhythm — see many
examples
Willy Frick onAugust 9, 2024
46 year old with chest pain
develops a wide complex
rhythm — see many
examples
Written by Colin Jenkins and Nhu-Nguyen Le with edits by Willy
Frick and by Smith
A 46-year-old male presented to the emergency department with 2
days of heavy substernal chest pain and nausea. He reported a
history of “Wolf-Parkinson-White” and “heart attack” but said neither
had been treated. These diagnoses were not found in his medical
records nor even a baseline ECG. He had no previously documented
medical problems except polysubstance use. An ECG was obtained
shortly after arrival:
There is no evidence of WPW on this ECG, but it is diagnostic for
OMI. In particular, we see:
STE and HATW across the precordium
Q waves in V1-V4
Subtle STE and HATW in I and aVL
Terminal TWI suggestive of early reperfusion most pronounced
in I, aVL, V5, and V6
Reciprocal STD with ischemic down-up T waves in II, III, aVF
Here is the Queenʼs interpretation with explainability:
Click here to sign up for Queen of Hearts Access
The ECG was signed “No STEMI” by the emergency physician and a
basic chest pain workup was initiated. About one hour later his high
sensitivity troponin I resulted at 3,000 ng/L (reference 3-54 ng/L).
The patient continued having chest pain. Three additional ECGs were
performed over the next 5 minutes:
The Queen of Hearts diagnoses OMI with high confidence in all three
of these ECGs. What are we seeing here? The rhythm is AIVR —
accelerated idioventricular rhythm. This has been discussed many
times before on this blog. (For laddergram of the 3rd ECG in todayʼs
case showing AIVR — See Ken Grauer illustration/discussion below).
There are three mechanisms of arrhythmia: automatic, re-entry, and
triggered. In-depth discussion is beyond the scope of this blog.
Briefly, triggered activity refers to an additional depolarization after
the initial depolarization and is mediated chiefly by calcium. The most
common triggered arrhythmia is Torsades de Pointes.
Automatic activity refers to enhanced pacemaking function (typically
from a non sinus node source), for example atrial tachycardia. But
the sinus node works on automatic activity, as do all escape
rhythms.
Finally, re-entry occurs when a circuit within the heart allows for
continuous depolarization of excitable tissue around a core of
unexcitable tissue. If the circuit is repolarized by the time it returns to
the starting point, it continues to depolarize around and around. This
can occur due to scar (e.g. post infarct VT) or anatomical variants
(e.g. AVNRT or AVRT).
Importantly, while the mechanism is not precisely defined, AIVR is
thought most likely to be automatic in nature [Ferrier,
Kaplinsky]. Because of its slow rate (50-120 bpm) relative to re-
entrant VT (often 180 bpm or faster), it typically does not interfere
with effective cardiac output. It is a benign arrhythmia which requires
no specific treatment.
In this patientʼs case, AIVR is not at all surprising since the first ECG
showed early reperfusion, and AIVR is commonly seen during
reperfusion. In case there was any doubt about the possibility of
reperfused OMI, the finding of AIVR confirms this.
The patient was given aspirin, heparin, morphine, and ondansetron
and and transferred to a PCI-capable facility for a diagnosis of
“unstable angina” with dynamic ECG changes. (Frick — one wonders
about the diagnosis of unstable angina in a patient with significantly
elevated biomarkers which would certainly have been rising on
repeat measurement.) About 2 hours later the patient arrived at a
PCI-capable center and repeat ECG was obtained:
The transferring EMS crew noted “runs of VT” during transport. The
receiving emergency physician consulted with interventional
cardiology who stated there was no STEMI. However the patient
continued to have chest pain and bedside ultrasound showed
hypokinesis of the septum with significantly reduced LVEF.
Fortunately the patient was then taken for angiography. Images are
shown below:
This is a right anterior oblique caudal view. Typically itʼs best for
the LCx and OMs, but it also clearly shows the tiny remaining stump
of the LAD which is occluded right at the ostium.
If the LAD is completely occluded, then why does the ECG show
reperfusion? There are two possible explanations (and they are not
mutually exclusive).
Explanation 1: There was some degree of antegrade perfusion at the
time the ECG, but the LAD has since re-occluded. The angiography is
a snapshot in time. The ECG tells you the state of the vessel at the
time the ECG was obtained, and that may change by the time the
patient gets to the cath lab. Especially if the patient is given anti-
thrombotic medications.
Explanation 2: The green arrow probably shows collaterals from the
distal OM to LAD, although that is not completely clear from the
available images. Rescue collateralization can develop quite rapidly,
and it is possible that small amount of retrograde perfusion is enough
to produce the ECG changes. This is one reason not to use
reperfusion findings on the ECG to justify delaying angiography.
Here is an image from after PCI. This is a right anterior oblique cranial
view, best for visualizing the LAD and diagonal branches which were
completely occluded prior to PCI. The LCx and OM vessels are not as
well visualized.
Learning points:
Both patients and other medical providers can report confusing
and often contradictory information that obfuscates the
diagnosis (in this case, WPW). If the story and ECG findings are
concerning, use your clinical judgment to advocate for PCI.
Perform serial ECGs even if symptoms are constant. Serial
ECGs enhance the diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome.
However, Smith and Meyers have proven that so called “early”
findings such as hyperacute T-waves often do not evolve to
diagnostic ST Elevation.
AIVR is not always the result of significant pathology, but is
classically associated with the reperfusion phase of acute
myocardial infarction.
Similarly, the OMI paradigm respects ACS as a dynamic process
in which ECG changes reflect the phase of myocardial injury
and risk stratify which patients may benefit from emergent PCI.
Although recognition of OMI was not affected by administration
of morphine in this case, use caution with analgesia in ongoing
ACS without a definitive plan for angiography. Opioids
associate with worse outcomes in myocardial infarction,
probably because they eliminate the pain signal that informs the
clinician of the urgency of revascularization.
Do not treat AIVR. In fact, use of antidyrhythimcs (e.g.,
lidocaine) can result in severe bradycardia or asystole
(Weinberg, Sedowski and Alexander, below)
The presence of accelerated idioventricular rhythm does not
affect prognosis, and there is no definitive evidence that, if left
untreated, the incidence of VF or death is increased. In other
words, it is a safe rhythm. Leave it alone. (Bigger et al. below)
Other examples of AIVR:
Young man with Gunshot wound to right chest with hemorrhagic shock,
but bullet path not near heart. A case of irregular accelerated
idioventricular rhythm (AIVR)
Getting It Right Despite the Wrong Paradigm
A Wide Complex Rhythm in an Intoxicated Patient
Chest pain and precordial ST depression which resolve, followed by a wide
complex rhythm
An adolescent with trauma, chest pain, and a wide complex rhythm
46 year old with chest pain develops a wide complex rhythm - see many examples - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Today’s post by Dr. Frick features another example of serial ECGs that
were diagnostic of acute OMI from the very 1st tracing in this case — yet
were overlooked by several physicians including cardiology staff as not
indicative of acute coronary occlusion.
Ironically — it is fortunate that this patient had continued CP
(Chest Pain) and an Echo showing a localized wall motion
abnormality — as those 2 factors apparently were the reason that
cardiac cath was performed.
As Dr. Frick has covered KEY details of today’s case in excellent fashion
— I decided to focus my comment on one of the 5 ECGs that were shown
above in his discussion.
For clarity in Figure-1 — I’ve reproduced and labeled the 3rd ECG
shown by Dr. Frick (which was the 2nd of the 3 repeat ECGs
obtained over a 5-minute span).
To “set the scene” for ECG #3 (that I show in Figure-1) — the
patient had ongoing CP at the time this ECG was done — with the
diagnoses of “No STEMI” and unstable agina being made for this
and the other serial tracings despite return of
a markedly increased troponin level.
MY Thoughts on ECG #3:
As per Dr. Frick — ECG #3 (as well as the other 2 repeat ECGs obtained
over the 5-minute span referred to above) is
clearly diagnostic of acute OMI.
Interpretation of the acute findings in ECG #3 is best accomplished
by first understanding the rhythm. I’ve labeled sinus P waves
with RED arrows. Note the underlying sinus arrhythmia, with fairly
marked variation in the P-P interval (with greatest slow-down
between beats #6-to-7).
Although P waves are partially hidden within portions of the QRS for
the first 2 beats, as well as for the last 6 beats in this tracing — RED
arrows over the QRS for each of these wide beats highlight “extra
deflections” occurring at various points around the QRS, that clearly
indicate partially hidden P waves that appear to be essentially “on
time” considering the underlying sinus arrhythmia.
Note that the QRS complex of beat #7 is a little smaller in the long
lead II and long lead V5 rhythm strips compared to the QRS size of
beats #8-thru-13. This is because beat #7 is a fusion beat (ie, the
RED arrow P wave seen just before the QRS of beat #7 does not
have enough time to be fully conducted to the ventricles). The
presence of fusion beats proves that the wide beats in this tracing
are all of ventricular etiology.
The rate of these wide beats in ECG #3 is ~75/minute. As per Dr.
Frick — this defines the ventricular rhythm as AIVR
(Accelerated IdioVentricular Rhythm).
The reason AIVR is seen in ECG #3 — is that the rate of the
underlying sinus arrhythmia slows after beat #5 — and once the
sinus rate drops below the accelerated ventricular escape rate,
AIVR takes over (Laddergram illustration of the mechanism of this
rhythm is shown below in Figure-2).
Once we’ve defined the rhythm in Figure-1 — we focus on assessment of
ST-T wave morphology first for the sinus-conducted beats (which are
beats #3,4,5 and 6).
Although tiny in size — the BLUE arrows highlight definite ST
elevation in leads I and aVL. ST segments in both of these leads
are abnormally straightened — and there is terminal T wave
inversion (which is more obvious in lead aVL). Considering the tiny
QRS — the Q wave in lead aVL is huge.
Each of the sinus-conducted beats in
the 3 inferior leads show reciprocal ST depression.
In addition — the ventricular beats in leads I,II,III show
disproportionately “bulky” T waves and inappropriate ST segment
deviation (ST elevation for beats #1,2 in lead I — and ST
depression for beats #1,2 in leads II,III).
While more difficult to assess the “appropriateness” of J-point
elevation in the chest leads because of the AIVR rhythm — lead
V6 clearly shows disproportionate J-point ST elevation, consistent
with acute OMI.
FINAL Point: During transport to the PCI center — the EMS crew
noted, “runs of VT”. Although no tracings are available showing the
rhythm that was thought to be “VT” — We see runs of AIVR similar to what
I’ve just described for ECG #3 in each of the last 4 tracings in today’s
case. I suspect the EMS crew misdiagnosed AIVR as VT.
As per Dr. Frick — in the setting of an ongoing acute OMI, the
occurrence of AIVR is often a favorable sign indicative of at least
some degree of reperfusion. No treatment of AIVR is needed if the
patient is hemodynamically stable — since this rhythm often serves
as an appropriate “escape” rhythm due to transient slowing of the
sinus pacemaker (ie, which is exactly what happens beginning
with beat #7 in ECG #3).
CAVEAT: The “atrial kick” is lost with AIVR (since P waves are no
longer conducting once AIVR takes over). As a result — cardiac
output may sometimes decrease enough to produce symptomatic
hypotension. When this occurs — a low dose of Atropine is the
treatment of choice — as this will usually speed up the SA node
enough for sinus rhythm to take over (with resumption of effective
atrial contraction). That said, most of the time — AIVR is a short-
lived and benign rhythm (as well as an encouraging sign that at
least some reperfusion is occurring).
Figure-1: The initial ECG in today’s case. (To improve visualization —
I’ve digitized the original ECG using PMcardio).
Figure-2: Laddergram illustration showing takeover over AIVR,
beginning with fusion beat #7 — as a result of slowing of the rate of
the underlying sinus arrhythmia.