A woman in her 50s with acute chest pain

A woman in her 50s with no significant past medical history experienced acute anterior chest pain that woke her from sleep and radiated to her back. She described it as “stabbing”, 8/10, constant, and associated with nausea. She denied preceding symptoms or recent illnesses.

Here is her triage ECG during active pain:
What do you think?

This ECG was recorded 30 minutes later with ongoing pain.

The physician was worried about possible acute coronary occlusion and activated the cath lab.

The angiogram showed no significant coronary disease.
First troponin I was 10 ng/L.
Second troponin was 23 ng/L.
Echocardiogram showed normal EF, no wall motion abnormalities, no pericardial effusion.

Here is the ECG the next day.
She was given colchicine and discharged.

She returned with similar symptoms about 1 month later.

Repeat echocardiogram revealed a small pericardial effusion.

Cardiac MRI was read as:

Acute pericarditis with signs of early constrictive physiology. The pericardium is diffusely thickened. There is diffuse late gadolinium enhancement of parietal and visceral layers consistent with pericardial inflammation. There is a small circumferential effusion, no tamponade physiology. Mild septal bounce demonstrates ventricular interdependence. IVC dilated to 2.9 cm with <50% collapse, suggesting early constrictive physiology. No myocardial LGE to suggest myocarditis or infarction.

Two troponins were <6 ng/L.
She was treated with colchicine and ibuprofen.
Rheumatologic and infectious workups were negative.

ECG recorded on day 4 of hospitalization.
ECG recorded on day 6 of hospitalization.

She was diagnosed with recurrent idiopathic pericarditis and discharged.

Here is her ECG 6 months later, without symptoms.

The “four stages of pericarditis on ECG” are taught as:
Stage 1: widespread STE and PR depression
Stage 2: ST segments return to baseline with T-wave flattening
Stage 3: T-wave inversion
Stage 4: Normalization

This patient fulfills the classic sequence.

Actual pericarditis is rare compared to normal variant baseline ST elevation.
The harm of missing OMI is far greater than the harm of mislabeling pericarditis.
“You diagnose pericarditis at your peril.”


Medicine is humbling. I included pericarditis in the differential but thought pure pericarditis was unlikely. I suspected acute LCx occlusion.

For clarity, I reproduced the initial ECG.

The ECG shows sinus rhythm ~90 bpm, normal intervals and axis, and extensive ST elevation. A 50-something woman awakened from sleep with severe new chest pain should be assumed to be having acute MI until proven otherwise.

Findings suggesting acute MI:

* Q waves present in multiple leads with ST elevation
* ST elevation pattern consistent with acute inferolateral infarction
* Reciprocal changes in aVL
* Hyperacute-appearing T waves in V3 and V4
* Possible (initially suspected) terminal QRS distortion in V4

Bottom line: ECG #1 looked like acute inferolateral STEMI needing prompt cath.

* Q waves in almost all STE leads (could represent early infarction)
* Inferior Q waves not consistent with normal septal q waves
* ST-T in lead II does not resemble lead I (expected in pericarditis)
* No reciprocal change expected, yet seen in aVL
* Flat ST in V2 (not typical for pericarditis)
* Hyperacute-appearing ST-T in V3 and V4 inconsistent with pericarditis

NOTE #1: Myocarditis could mimic this ECG, but normal cath, troponins, echo, and MRI ruled it out.
NOTE #2: No pericardial friction rub reported (which would confirm diagnosis).
NOTE #3: Pain not described as pleuritic or positional (pain was “constant” and “stabbing”).

* Acute MI is far more common than pericarditis in ED settings.
* Missing an MI is far more dangerous than missing pericarditis.
* This case illustrates appropriate activation of the cath lab.
* It expands understanding of atypical ECG presentations of pericarditis.
* It is a reminder that patients do not always present in textbook fashion.
