=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Acute Chest pain, 2 years in a row. - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:46.306424",
  "file_size_bytes": 26478707,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Acute Chest pain, 2 years in a row. - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Pendell Meyers onSeptember 28, 2025
Acute Chest pain, 2 years in
a row.
A man in his 30s presented for similar symptoms (acute
substernal chest pain) twice, each visit one year apart.
Visit #1
History including acute substernal chest pain, shortness of
breath, and diaphoresis, within 3 hours onset. Obesity but no
other cardiac risk factors. Vitals within normal limits.
ECG:
 
What do you think?
Meyers: Many leads with STE, meeting STEMI criteria, but T
waves are non-hyperacute, benign ST morphology, spodick
sign, and some PR depression. DDX is pericarditis vs. normal

variant. No signs of OMI. Notice how aVR must
 1/15
mathematically have ST depression because many
leftward/downward leads have STE.
Smith: I think most important is that the STE in II is far higher
than in III AND there is no reciprocal STD in aVL. Our study
showed that zero patients with pericarditis had reciprocal
STD in any lead other than aVR, AND that 99% of inferior OMI
had some (often minimal) amount of STD in aVL. So although
I often write that “you diagnose pericarditis at your peril”, in
this case it is almost certainly not OMI.
Bischof JE, Worrall C, Thompson P, Marti D, Smith SW. ST
depression in lead aVL differentiates inferior ST-
elevation myocardial infarction from pericarditis. Am J
Emerg Med [Internet] 2016;34(2):149–54. Available from:

Queen of Hearts interpretation:
New PMcardio for Individuals App 3.0 now includes
the latest Queen of Hearts model and AI explainability (blue
heatmaps)! Download now for iOS or
Android. 
individuals/
Code STEMI activated, emergent angiogram: normal
coronary arteries
Serial high sensitivity troponin I:
<6, 13, 15, 19, 14, (none further measured)
ESR elevated at 30 mm/hr, CRP elevated at 6.1 mg/dL
Repeat ECG:
 2/15
Queen of Hearts interpretation:
In this view you can see the raw score (from zero to 1.0, with
zero being highest possible certainty of NO OMI, and 1.0
being highest possible certainty of YES OMI). This ECG has a
score of 0.00, as confident as possible that there are no ECG
signs of OMI, despite lots of STE and obvious STEMI criteria.
Echo with no wall motion abnormalities, normal EF, and no
pericardial effusion.
Cardiac MRI showed:
No late gadolinium enhancement of the myocardium to
suggest infarction or inflammation
Normal LVEF
“Patchy pericardial late enhancement adjacent to LV free
wall with abnormal T1 and T2 signal that is consistent
with acute pericarditis”
Visit #2
Almost exactly the same history written in the HPI as visit 1
above.
ECG:
 3/15
Queen of Hearts:
Code STEMI activated, emergent angiogram: normal
coronary arteries
Serial high sensitivity troponin I: <6, <6, <6; (none further
measured)
ESR elevated at 33 mm/hr, CRP elevated 8.7 mg/dL
Repeat ECG:
Queen of Hearts:
 4/15
Echo: no wall motion abnormalities and normal EF. A
moderate sized pericardial effusion was present.
Cardiac MRI during this visit showed:
No late gadolinium enhancement of the myocardium to
suggest infarction or inflammation
Normal LVEF
“Moderate sized circumferential pericardial effusion
measuring up to 1.8 cm inferior to the right ventricle and
1.2 cm lateral to the left ventricle. The effusion is
transudative with T1 times in the 3100-3200 ms range.
There are no signs of increased intrapericardial
pressures. There is pericardial late gadolinium
enhancement adjacent to the basal to mid anterior wall
and anterior to the apex consistent with
inflammation/acute pericarditis.”
ECG 4 days later:
Queen of Hearts:
 5/15
The patient was treated well for recurrent pericarditis.
Learning Points:
This was a case of pericarditis, not OMI. Pericarditis does
exist, but itʼs much rarer than OMI. Please donʼt ever
misdiagnose OMI for pericarditis. The harm of one missed
OMI outweighs many unnecessary uncomplicated
angiograms.
Anyone can become an ECG expert with guided practice and
correlation with actual patient outcomes (not just the final
diagnosis written in the STEMI metrics database!). We have
provided this education on this blog since 2008 for free, and
always will continue to do so.
If you donʼt have the time or desire to become an expert to
provide optimal care for these patients and OMI patients, then
consider using an AI ECG model that is trained for this
purpose. Queen of Hearts is made by us, and is by far the
best so far. If someday competition arises and performs
better, then that would be even better for patients!
Smith: I have been teaching the ECG diagnosis of MI for 37
years. After all that experience, I believe that very few health
care providers have all of the characteristics necessary to be
true ECG experts. This expertise can be learned to some
extent by some people, but for most even with dedicated
study it is not reachable. Such a learner requires:
1. Motivation
2. Time
3. The (rare) native visual talent for “seeing” waveform
differences and similarities.
Therefore, I believe that the PMCardio Queen of Hearts AI
Model is an absolute necessity for good care of chest pain
 6/15
patients.
Example: At TCT in San Francisco at the end of October, we
will present a study of over 1000 STEMI Activations and show
that the use of the Queen of Hearts on the initial ECG would
have 1) decreased false positive activations from 41% to 7%
and 2) resulted in earlier activation for 2/3 of the 30% who
were not activated on the first ECG.
= = =
======================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD
(9/28/2025):
Todayʼs case by Dr. Meyers highlights a number of important
points regarding the diagnosis and potential misdiagnosis of
acute pericarditis as a cause of new CP (Chest Pain) in
patients who present for emergency care.
The 1st problem in this regard relates to the challenge of
assessing the true incidence of acute pericarditis (ie, of
pericarditis without associated myocarditis) in an
emergency setting. Cited as accounting for ~5% of all
ED admissions for acute CP (Andreis et al —Intern
Emerg Med 16(3):551-558, 2021— and — Dababneh
and Siddique — StatPearls, 2025) — our experience
suggests the true incidence of acute pericarditis
accounts for a significantly lower percentage than this of
ED admissions.
Instead, as we frequently caution on Dr. Smithʼs ECG
Blog — the entity of acute pericarditis tends to be
greatly overdiagnosed(all-too-often seemingly by
default through application of a series of imperfect ECG
criteria). As a result, when confronted with a case
suggestive of acute pericarditis — I find myself
repeating the mantra instilled in me by the wisdom of
Drs. Meyers and Smith, “In a patient with new CP —
You diagnosis acute pericarditis at your peril”(simply
because in an emergency setting — an acute cardiac
syndrome will be statistically muchmore common than
acute pericarditis).
The above said — todayʼs case illustrates that pure
acute pericarditis does occur on occasion.
PEARL: The fact that todayʼs patient presented 1 year
after his first episode of acute pericarditis with a nearly
identical clinical history — should have been a big clue
 7/15
that his 2nd presentation represented a recurrence of
acute pericarditis. Up to 30% of patients with an initial
episode of acute idiopathic pericarditis will have ≥1
additional episodes ( = recurrent pericarditis).
NOTE: The entity of acutemyocarditis(including acute
myo-pericarditis) is not nearly as elusive a diagnosis as
is pure acute pericarditis — because unlike pure
pericarditis, serum Troponin is generally elevated (often
significantly) with myocarditis. As weʼve shown in many
cases in Dr. Smithʼs ECG Blog — at times, cardiac
catheterization may be needed to distinguish between
acute OMI vs acute myocarditis.
= = =
Todayʼs Initial ECG:
Armed with awareness that acute OMI is a muchmore
common cause of acute CP presenting to the ED than acute
pericarditis — I found myself thinking that of all the initial
ECGs Iʼve seen in my decade of following all cases on Dr.
Smithʼs ECG Blog — todayʼs initial ECG (that Iʼve reproduced
and labeled in Figure-1) fits a “textbook description” for the
ECG picture of acute pericarditis as well as any other ECG
that Iʼve seen.
I review “My Take” on the ECG diagnosis of acute
pericarditis in My Comment in the May 16, 2023 post of
Dr. Smithʼs ECG Blog (including a 9-page PDF
summary).
For additional insight regarding ECG diagnosis of acute
pericarditis in a challenging case — Check out My
Comment in the June 15, 2025 Post .
ECG Findings in Figure-1 that suggest Acute Pericarditis:
Diffuse ST elevation(seen here in 9/12 leads! = RED
arrows ).
PR depression in multiple leads — with PR elevation in
aVR (BLUE arrows in these leads).
The ST-T wave appearance in lead II resembles lead I
(more than it does lead III — whereas with acute OMI,
lead II resembles lead III).
Unlike acute MI — with acute pericarditis:i) There is
no reciprocal ST depression; ii) Infarction Q waves are
absent (The q waves that are seen in Figure-1 are small
in size and narrow — consistent with normal “septal” q
waves); iii) There is normal R wave progression
(whereas with anterior MI there is often loss of anterior
R waves); and, iv) The shape of the elevated ST-T
 8/15
waves is upsloping (“smiley”-configuration) — as
opposed to the ST segment coving that is more often
seen with acute OMI.
The ST/T wave ratio in lead V6 >0.25 (or at least it
looks like the ratio is >0.25 — with this being somewhat
difficult to assess given PR depression seen in lead V6).
Spodickʼs Sign is present (a downsloping of the TP [or
entire QRS-TP] segment that may be present in a
number of leads with acute pericarditis = the downward
slanting RED dotted line in lead V5).
= = =
Figure-1: Iʼve labeled the initial ECG in todayʼs case.
Additional Clinical Considerations:
Iʼll highlight some selected clinical points of interest regarding
the diagnosis of acute pericarditis (supported by the Andreis
and Dababneh/Siddique manuscripts that I cite above):
Potential etiologies of acute pericarditis are numerous
(including bacterial, viral, fungal infections —
malignancy — connective tissue disorders — metabolic
conditions (uremia; myxedema) — pericardial trauma; —
post-MI (Dressler Syndrome) — infiltrative disorders
(amyloidosis; sarcoidosis — and others).
The above said — in up to 90% of cases, no clear
etiology for acute pericarditis is found — in which case
the disorder is classified as acute “idiopathic“
pericarditis.
Because of how common it is with acute idiopathic
pericarditis for no definite etiology to be found
— extensive diagnostic evaluation is rarely necessary
unless there issuspicionfor a specific etiology.
Potential treatments for acute pericarditis include: i)
NSAIDs; ii) Colchicine (for its anti-inflammatory effect);
iii) Corticosteroids; and, iv) Other anti-inflammtory
 9/15
agents (with newer treatments including anti-interleukin-
1 [IL-1] agents that hold promise for more effective
control of recurrent pericarditis— Kumar et al — ACC:
Latest in Card, 2023).
As alluded to earlier — the overall incidence of recurrent
idiopathic pericarditis cited in the literature is between
15-30% of cases. Of note — treatment of patients with
corticosteroids expedites resolution of symptoms, but is
associated with a much higher recurrence rate. In
contrast — use of colchicine instead of corticosteroids
is associated with a much lower recurrence rate (with
colchicine often combined with NSAIDs, and with
treatment often extended for 6-12 months). The hope is
that newer anti-interleukin-1 agents will be even more
effective in preventing recurrence.
NOTE #1: No mention is made in todayʼs history as to
whether a pericardialfrictionrub was (or was not)
present. This is unfortunate (but all-too-common in the
cases I routinely see posted on the internet) — because
IF a pericardial friction rub is heard, then you
have made the diagnosis of acute pericarditis! (and
unnecessary cardiac catheterization may have been
avoided in both instances in which todayʼs patient
presented with acute pericarditis).
NOTE #2: No mention was made regarding any
potential positional relationship or pleuritic nature of
this patientʼs CP (the CP was instead described as
“substernal”, associated with shortness of breath and
diaphoresis). While a patientʼs description of the nature
of their CP is by definition subjective (with imperfect
correlation to textbook description of pericardial pain)
— there is a tendency for pericarditisCP to
be “pleuritic” (increasing with inspiration due to
commonly associated pleural inflammation) —
and “positional” (commonly relieved by sitting up and
exacerbated by lying supine, which increases “stretch”
on the inflammed pericardium).
Pendell Meyers onSeptember 28, 2025
EXPERTISE IN ECG OMI RECOGNITION
FALSE POSITIVE CATH LAB ACTIVATION PERICARDITIS
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
Rapid SVT, diagnosis? An elderly male with
acute chest pain
 10/15
SEARCH
