=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Chest pain followed by 6 days of increasing dyspnea - what happened_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:59.618521",
  "file_size_bytes": 21099179,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Chest pain followed by 6 days of increasing dyspnea - what happened_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Magnus Nossen onFebruary 26, 2025
Chest pain followed by 6
days of increasing dyspnea
— what happened?
Written by Magnus Nossen, edits by Smith
The patient in todayʼs case is an 85-year-old male with a history of
COPD and dementia. He presented to the emergency department for
evaluation. Lets us consider two different clinical presentations. How
will you manage this patient in each scenario?
Scenario 1: The patient presents with 24 hours of substernal chest
pain.
Scenario 2: The patient presents with 6 days of dyspnea.
Below is his presentation ECG. What do you think? How do you
explain the ST segment elevation in the precordial and limb leads?
 

 1/18
The above ECG was originally recorded with a paper speed of
50mm/sec. It has been “compressed” on the X-axis so that it
looks like it was recorded with a paper speed of 25mm/sec.
Interpretation: The ECG shows sinus rhythm at 94 beats per minute.
QRS-complexes are narrow, QRS-axis in the frontal plane is close to
vertical at about 90 degrees. The precordial and inferior leads show
ST segment elevation. Let us first look at the precordial leads:
Early precordial leads V2 and V3 have minimal R-waves followed by
deep S-waves and ST elevation. Lead V4 does not have an R-wave
but instead has a QS complex followed by ST elevation. There is
some R wave in the lateral precordial leads. Leads V3 and V4 both
have 6mm ST elevation. When there are QS-waves, one should
always think about LV aneurysm, but ST to QRS ratio and T-wave to
QRS ratio are far too large and not compatible with left ventricular
aneurysm. This ECG shows a lot of “acuity”. There is substantial area
under the ST-segment and area under the T-waves. This correlates
with potentially salvageable myocardium.
Smith: T waves are very hyperacute: these are a sign of ACUTE
infarction, even if there are Q-waves. See Raitt et al.: 50% of LAD
STEMI have Q-waves by one hour. While most of these are QR-
waves (not QS-waves), QS-waves are still possible in Acute MI; that
is why I needed to create a rule to differentiate the ST Elevation and
QS-waves of Acute anterior MI from that of LV aneurysm. So it is not
necessarily subacute. The exception is with postinfarction
pericarditis, in which a completed transmural infarct results in
inflammation of the subepicardial myocardium and STE in the
distribution of the infarct, and which results in increased STE and
large upright T-waves. The ECG findings in isolation must be
assumed to be acute MI until proven otherwise. The presence of Q-
waves does NOT in any way rule out acute OMI. It might even be an
acute OMI superimposed on an old Q-wave OMI. So one must
activate the cath lab in order to assess. It will probably show an
occlusion of the LAD, and it might be difficult to know how long the
occlusion has been there and how viable the myocardium is, but it
needs to be opened.
We have now looked at the precordial leads, they show findings
consistent with an acute or subacute OMI. Let us have a look at the
limb lead ST-T changes.
What do you make of the inferior lead ST elevation? Is this ST
elevation ischemic in nature? Could the inferior lead ST-elevation be
due to a “wrap around” LAD that supplies the inferior wall? And if so,
could the patient benefit from revascularization?
 2/18
The ST segment elevation in the inferior leads do not have a typical
ischemic look. the ST segments are upward concave with distinct J-
waves in leads II and aVF. There is also slight PR segment
depression. These findings together are more commonly seen with
pericarditis.
Smith: In limb leads, the ST vector is towards lead II (STE lead II
STE lead III, which is more likely with pericarditis than with STEMI).
However, postinfarction pericarditis is usually limited to the area of
infarct (unlike idiopathic pericarditis, which involved the entire
pericardium and has diffuse STE with an ST vector towards leads II
and V5). This is why postinfarction pericarditis is called
“postinfarction regional pericarditis”
Conclusion: In summary, the ECG changes seen in todayʼs initial ECG
could be compatible both with an acute anterior wall MI with early Q-
wave development. It could also, given a different clinical context be
compatible with a subacute myocardial infarction complicated by
post infarct regional pericarditis. Clinical correlation is key in
managing patients in the best possible way.
Back to the case:Scenario 2 was the actual presentation of this 80-
year-old man. Due to very severe dementia, it was impossible to
obtain a detailed history. His wife was able to report that the patient
had a brief episode of chest discomfort 6 days prior, followed by
intermittent complaints of dyspnea. He was seen by a health care
provider 4 days prior to admission for dyspnea and was started on
oral antibiotics for suspected pneumonia. He did not improve.
The ECG and clinical history is compatible with a subacute transmural
infarction of the LAD territory. The persistently large and upright
anterior wall T waves and the inferior wall ST-segment elevation is
likely the result of a combination of subacute MI and post infarct
pericarditis. As discussed above, postinfarction pericarditis is not
generally diffuse like standard pericarditis. It is generally localized to
the area of infarct; thus, there might be a wrap around LAD that
supplied the inferior wall.
As Dr Smith has pointed out numerous times on this blog, the
ECG is a great tool to assess myocardial viability. Denying
patients the potential benefit of revascularization just because
their symptoms have lasted a certain amount of time shows
poor understanding of the pathophysiology of myocardial
ischemia.
Patients may have repeated episodes of transient reperfusion
preventing the myocardium from undergoing necrosis. Also,
some patients have enough collateral blood flow that will keep
the myocardium viable.
The ECG, clinical history and echo together should guide the
decision on whether or not the patient should go to the cath
 3/18
lab.
Among the complications of transmural infarction is post
infarction pericarditis (PIRP). This complication is much more
likely in patients whom have delayed or no
revascularization. One study which evaluated ST-segment
elevation MI patients over a 13-year period demonstrated only
1.2% of patients developed PIRP [1]. Rates of occurrence of
PIRP have decreased drastically in the era of percutaneous
coronary intervention. Despite its low incidence rates in
recent years, it is important to consider PIRP in patients with
recent MI.
What should make you suspect PIRP?
Oliva et al. [2] strongly associated myocardial rupture
with postinfarction regional pericarditis (PIRP), and associated
PIRP with persistent upright T-waves. He found 2 ECG
patterns of atypical T-wave development in PIRP:
Persistently positive (upright) T-waves 48 hours after
AMI onset.
Premature, gradual reversal of inverted T waves to
positive (upright) deflections by 48 to 72 hours after
MI onset in the presence of well formed Q-waves.
The only other processes identified that caused this type of
postinfarction T wave evolution were cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
reinfarction, and very small infarcts. Both reperfusion, as judged by
the biomarker curve, and patency, as assessed by the angiogram,
were correlated with the rapidity and depth of T wave
inversion. Ninety percent of patients with reperfusion attained a
maximum T wave negativity of 3 mm or more within 48 hours after
the onset of chest pain in the lead that initially displayed the greatest
ST segment elevation. Seventy-six percent of
patients without reperfusion attained a maximum negativity of 2 mm
or less within 72 hours. Thus, upright T waves beyond 72 hours after
acute MI should make you considered the possibility of PIRP.
When a patient who initially had T-wave inversion due to reperfusion
or as a natural course of an untreated MI develops upright T-waves,
we call this pseudonormalization of T-waves. In this scenario, there
are two main etiologies to consider:
1) Re-occlusion of the infarct related artery. (Most common cause)
2) Post infarct regional pericarditis. (Second most common
cause)
Clinical course: The patient in todayʼs case did not undergo
revascularization. Due to the atypical and vague symptoms, the
 4/18
myocardial infarct was not initially diagnosed. At presentation he had
a history of dyspnea for 6 days. There were no other causes of
dyspnea apparent and thus we can assume that myocardial ischemia
started 6 days prior. T waves should have been inverted at the time of
presentation if this was an uncomplicated transmural anterior wall MI.
The fact that they were not, makes post infarction regional
pericarditis likely as the cause of persistently upright T waves.
Patients with suspected ACS should be evaluated with
echocardiography. Nowadays pocket sized devices make it possible
to quickly get an overview of the heart function of a patient by the
bedside. Perhaps not all readers of this blog are experienced
evaluating echo images.
Above I have reproduced a still frame image from the bed side
echo done on this patient. The top of the image is closest to the
echo probe. The apex of the heart is at the top of the image with
the base at the bottom. The heart chamber are annotated. (RA =
right atrium. RV = right ventricle. LA = left atrium. LV =left
ventricle. IVS = interventricular septum.)
 5/18
This video shows the regional wall motion abnormality of the distal
septum and apical region of the left ventricle. The distal septum
appears thickened. This is not due to hypertrophy. The myocardium
appears thickened (pseudohypertrophied) due to myocardial edema.
The edema also makes the necrotic myocardium less echo dense
making it appear less “white”
The above echo loop shows a high turbulence flow that traverses the
distal interventricular septum. This is consistent with a ventricular
septal rupture (VSR). Mechanical complications such as VSR and free
wall rupture are associated with post infarct regional pericarditis. This
patient as expected presented with a new harsh holosystolic
murmur.
 6/18
This image show the direction of blood flow from the left ventricle
(high pressure system) through the ventricular septal rupture to
the right ventricle (low pressure system). If the defect is a large
one, pressure across the defect will equalize quickly and the
pressure gradient will be low. If the defect on the other hand is
small, pressures will not equalize and a pressure gradient can be
measured by doppler. The pressure gradient in this case was
significant indicating that the defect is rather small. The larger the
size of the defect the larger the shunt. Larger shunt volume
means less blood exiting the left ventricle through the aortic valve
and lower cardiac output.
When there is full thickness infarction, there is epicardial
inflammation (post-infarction regional pericarditis), and the
myocardium is at risk of “rupture.” The term “rupture” makes it sound
like some sort of explosion or massive blowout, but it is usually a
small, slow leak that, over time, can cause tamponade and death.
Rupture can be either free wall rupture (causing tamponade) or septal
rupture, causing ventricular septal defect with left to right flow and
resulting pulmonary edema and shock.
VSR following myocardial infarction carries a grave prognosis with a
virtual 100% one-year mortality without surgical correction. The
patient in todays case had two complications (PIRP and VSR)
following an undiagnosed anterior wall MI. The patient was not
considered a surgical candidate. Mechanical complications such as
free wall rupture, VSR and papillary muscle rupture is more likely to
occur in patients who are older, female, hypertensive, have chronic
kidney disease, and have no prior history of smoking. It commonly
occurs in the setting of a first myocardial infarction (MI) in the
background of delayed or absent reperfusion therapy. Angiography
usually reveals an absence of collateral circulation to the infarct
zone.
Becausepreviousischemia induces myocardial preconditioning,
decreasing the likelihood of transmural myocardial necrosis and
myocardial rupture, patients with evidence of diabetes mellitus,
chronic angina or previous MI are less likely to experience a rupture.
VSR may develop within 1-14 days post MI, however itʼs incidence
usually shows a bimodal peak which is within 24 hours and after 3-5
days post MI tend to occur in patient with completed myocardial
infarctions where
For patients considered candidates for surgery the timing of surgery
is crucial. Necrotic myocardium is fragile. Following infarction,
metalloproteinase activity and tissue breakdown peak by day 7,
whereas deposition of new collagen begins by days 2-4. Necrotic
myocytes are entirely replaced by collagen by 28 days and therefore,
postponing surgical correction might facilitate successful repair by
 7/18
allowing friable tissue to organize, strengthen, and become well-
differentiated from surrounding healthy tissue.
It follows then from the above paragraph that it is important to
stabilize patient enough so that surgery can be planned and timed
optimally.
For more on hemodynamic effects and how to manage a patient with
VSR see this post: Why the sudden shock after a few days of
malaise?
For another example of PIRP and VSR see this post:
Subacute AnteroSeptal STEMI, With Persistent ST
elevation and Upright T-waves
Learning points:
QS-waves with persistent ST Elevation and/or hyperacute T-
waves may be due to either Acute MI or to Subacute completed
MI with post-infarction pericarditis.
Postinfarction Pericarditis implies complete transmural
infarction and puts the patient at risk for ventricular septal
rupture or even free wall myocardial rupture.
Mechanical complications of transmural infarction are rare and
dreaded sequela and have high morbidity and mortality.
New onset harsh systolic murmur in a patient with subacute
completed MI is VSR or papillary muscle rupture (with acute
mitral regurgitation) until proven otherwise.
Post infarction regional pericarditis (PIRP) can be suspected
from the ECG and is associated with an increased risk of
myocardial rupture.
Clinical correlation must always be sought before decision
making.
References:
[1] Lador, A. et. al. (2017). Incidence and Prognosis of Pericarditis
After ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (from the Acute Coronary
Syndrome Israeli Survey 2000 to 2013 Registry Database). The
American Journal of Cardiology, 121(6), 690–694. 
16/j.amjcard.2017.12.006
[2] Oliva, P. B., Hammill, S. C., & Edwards, W. D.
(1993). Electrocardiographic diagnosis of postinfarction regional
pericarditis. Ancillary observations regarding the effect of reperfusion
 8/18
on the rapidity and amplitude of T wave inversion after acute
myocardial infarction. Circulation, 88(3), 896–904. 
161/01.cir.88.3.896
[3] Oliva PB, Hammill SC, Edwards WD. Cardiac rupture, a clinically p
redictable complication of acute myocardial infarction: report of 70 ca
ses with clinicopathologic correlations. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993; 22:72
0-726.
[4] Wang, S., Liu, H., Yang, P., Wang, Z., & Chen, S. (2024). Current
Understanding of Timing of Surgical Repair for Ventricular Septal
Rupture following Acute Myocardial Infarction. Cardiology, 1–14. http
s://doi.org/10.1159/000538967
[5] Vega, J. D. S., Salinas, G. L. A., et. al (2022). Optimal surgical timi
ng after post-infarction ventricular septal rupture. Cardiology Journa
l, 29(5), 773–781. 
[6] Contemporary Management of Post-MI Ventricular Septal
Rupture – American College of Cardiology. (2018, July 30).
American College of Cardiology. 
logy/articles/2018/07/30/06/58/contemporary-management-of-post-
mi-ventricular-septal-rupture
===================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD (2/26/2025):
===================================
I found today’s case highly insightful with regard to many aspects. These
include:
The fact that although serious complications from acute MI are far
less common than in years past — today’s case manifests
a “combination” of post-infarct complications (ie, post-MI
pericarditis; post-MI VSR = Ventricular Septal Rupture). Awareness
of the course of these complications is important to facilitate earlier
detection.
This patient’s MI was in large part “silent“ — in that CP
(Chest Pain) was not a prominant complaint. Instead, the patient’s
primary symptom was severe dyspnea (See the September 5,
2024 post in Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog regarding the frequency of
“silent” MI, especially in older patients who present with acute
dyspnea — with that Sept. 5 case also from Dr. Nossen, and also
associated with post-MI VSR).
Physical Exam was revealing. Most of the time with acute MI —
little additional information is provided by physical examination (with
exception of those acute MI patients who present with heart failure
 9/18
or shock). Today’s patient presented with
a harsh, holosystolic murmur consistent with acute VSR. This
was detected on admission through the ED
(Emergency Department) — but we are not provided with
information as to whether a murmur was detected 4 days earlier
when the patient was seen in an ambulatory care center and treated
with antibiotics for pneumonia. This is relevant — as
knowing when the murmur appeared may have expedited
realization of VSR in this elderly patient with dementia and severe
dyspnea.
We are not told if a pericardial friction rub was listened for. This
could have been another clue for facilitating earlier recognition of
tihs patient’s post-event pericarditis.
Point of care Echo was diagnostic — showing obvious regional
wall motion abnormality of the distal septum and ventricular apex.
Once again, earlier use of Echo would have expedited recognition of
the cause of this patient’s dyspnea that began 6 days earlier.
Finally — No ECG was apparently done 4 days earlier at the
time of the primary care visit. I learned by subsequent history that
this initial encounter was a the ED for evaluation at that time. This is not in any way a criticism
— since we clearly lack details for any judgment. But we learn from
cases that don’t go as expected (ie, it appears the patient never had
pneumonia) — and doing the “hard work” of considering what we
might do differently the next time we encounter a similar situation is
how we improve as clinicians.
P.S.: There is no mention of a prior ECG in today’s case. Realizing
that we are not privy to many of the details in today’s case —
locating a prior tracing for comparison may have clarified a number
of conflicting findings in today’s ECG (that I’ve reproduced and
labeled in Figure-1).
QUESTION:
How would you interpret the ECG in Figure-1?
 10/18
Figure-1: I’ve labeled the initial ECG in today’s case.
============================
NOTE: The ECG in Figure-1 was initially recorded using
the Cabrera Format — in which both the recording speed and
limb lead sequencing have been altered (ie, Rather than +aVR —
the negative display of lead aVR is used = -aVR).
Because my “ECG brain” has been wired for interpretation of
ECGs at the 25 mm/second speed (that is standard in the
U.S. and in most of the world) — My routine is
to selectively reduce the width of such tracings by 50% to
compensate for the 50 mm/second speed routinely used
with the Cabrera format. This has been done in Figure-1.
Outlined in BLUE just above lead V1 — are several ECG
grid boxes to facilitate recognizing that the R-R interval
in ECG #1 is slightly more than 3 large boxes in duration —
corresponding to sinus rhythm at a rate of ~90-95/minute.
Given globalization of our world — we favor familiarization
with different recording formats (For detailed review of
the Cabrera Format — Check out My Comment at the
bottom of the page in the October 26, 2020 post in Dr.
Smith’s ECG Blog).
============================
The ECG in Figure-1:
As noted — there is sinus rhythm at ~90-95/minute. The PR
interval is normal. The QRS is not wide.
The QTc appears to be at the upper limit of normal, or
borderline prolonged (Using our QTc Calculator described
 11/18
in the January 12, 2025 post — and plugging in a rate of
~95/minute and a measured QT = 370 msec, as seen in
leads V3,V4 — we come up with an estimated QTc clearly
under 450 msec., or still normal).
Although mid-precordial S waves are quite deep — voltage
criteria for LVH are not quite met (See My Comment in
the June 20, 2020 post). Instead, the deep chest lead S
waves are probably the result of a lack of opposing forces
from extensive anterior infarction.
There are Q waves:
Multiple Q waves are seen. Although narrow — Q waves
are fairly deep in leads -aVR,II,aVF,III; and in leads
V5,V6 (BLUE arrows in these leads).
There is loss of r wave between leads V2-to-V3 (RED
arrows in these leads).
This is followed by a deep QS wave in lead V4. There is
fragmentation near the beginning of S wave
downslope (within the dotted BLUE oval in this lead V4).
Whereas it is hard to know what to make of the relatively
narrow diffuse limb lead Q waves — the chest lead findings
of “loss of r wave” + fragmented QS in V4 + much deeper-
than-expected Q waves in V5,V6
indicate extensive anterior MI at some point in time.
Simple pericarditis does not manifest infarction Q waves.
But Q waves are common with post-infarction pericarditis.
There is marked and diffuse ST elevation:
Remarkable for their similarity — 4 successive limb
leads ( = leads -aVR,II,aVF,III ) all show Q waves followed
by significant J-point ST elevation. Straightening of the ST
segments in each of these leads to “my eye” suggests
acuity.
In the face of these 4 successive limb leads showing ST
elevation — My “eye” was drawn to mirror-image
opposite ST depression in lead aVL and a distinct
flattening of the ST segment in neighboring lead I (within the
2 BLUE rectangles).
ST elevation is marked in leads V3,V4 (more than 4 mm.).
Neighboring leads V5,V6 manifest a lesser degree of ST
elevation.
Simple pericarditis does not manifest the kind of reciprocal
ST-T wave changes seen in high-lateral leads I,aVL. But the
finding of ST elevation in 8/12 leads, in association with the
above noted Q waves is probably most consistent
 12/18
with recent extensive infero-antero-lateral MI, now
with post-infarction pericarditis.
Final Thoughts:
I wish we knew more about certain specifics regarding today’s
case. When did the MI begin? When was the VSR? How
extensive was this patient’s heart disease prior to this recent
event?
The above said — given the patient’s age, co-morbidities,
and the decision that he was not a surgical candidate, there
was little to do clinically that would alter this patient’s
guarded outcome.
Magnus Nossen onFebruary 26, 2025
MYOCARDIAL RUPTURE POSTINFARCTION REGIONAL PERICARDITIS
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL RUPTURE
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
Acute coma, then Pay now (in the
Sudden PEA arrest in evening) or pay later
front of paramedics, with interest (in the
with STEMI? middle of the night).
