An elderly woman presented with one day of chest and right arm pain, as well as abdominal pain. There was associated tingling and numbness in the right hand and generalized weakness, worse on the right side.

Initial ECG

There is widespread artifact, except in lead III. Since lead III is not artifactual, the artifact is caused by movement of the right arm electrode, and the ECG should be re-recorded.

Despite artifact, there is ST depression in lead III. ST depression in lead III should raise concern for reciprocal ST elevation in aVL, suggestive of high lateral occlusion myocardial infarction. Leads aVL, I, and V2 must be scrutinized, but they are distorted by artifact.

This finding is extremely easy to overlook unless there is high suspicion for occlusion myocardial infarction.

Initial Clinical Course

The provider recognized artifact but did not identify concerning findings and did not order a repeat ECG.

Laboratory studies, including troponins, were ordered, and the patient was placed in the waiting room pending bed availability.

The first troponin returned at 45,000 ng/L, indicating a large myocardial infarction that was subacute.

Prior ECG

A previous ECG showed baseline ST elevation in inferior leads, including lead III. At that time, there was no myocardial infarction, and this represented baseline ST elevation.

This prior ECG confirms that the ST depression in lead III on the current ECG is abnormal.

Repeat ECG

The patient was brought to the critical care area and another ECG was recorded.

There is sinus rhythm with premature ventricular complexes.

There is inferior ST depression with ST elevation and a coved ST segment in aVL. There is ST elevation in leads V5–V6. There are new Q waves in leads aVL, V5–V6.

This ECG is diagnostic of occlusion myocardial infarction, but it is subacute.

Interpretation and Timing

The ECG shows STEMI-equivalent findings.

This represents subacute myocardial infarction, as evidenced by:

Very high initial troponin of 45,000 ng/L

One full day of chest pain

Q waves with T-wave inversion

Imaging

Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with aortic angiography was performed due to concern for abdominal pathology and prior aortic disease.

A frame of the CT scan including the heart demonstrates the infarct.

Angiography

Coronary angiography revealed 100% occlusion of the ramus intermedius. The ramus intermedius is an occasional artery between the circumflex and the LAD and often takes the place of a large first diagonal, with the same myocardial distribution.

The vessel was opened and stented.

Biomarkers

Serial troponins were markedly elevated.

Echocardiography

Left ventricular size was normal with hyperdynamic systolic function and an estimated ejection fraction of 77%.

There was a regional wall motion abnormality with mid-anterior akinesis.

Compared to transthoracic echocardiography from 7/3/24, the anterior regional wall motion abnormality was new and consistent with ischemia or infarction in the LAD territory.

ECG Artifact Analysis

Marked artifact in the initial ECG made limb lead assessment difficult, with lead III being the only undistorted lead.

Artifact maximal in leads I and II with lead III spared indicates the right arm electrode as the source.

In the repeat ECG, artifact was primarily baseline distortion and localized to the left arm electrode.

Rhythm Findings on Repeat ECG

The rhythm is ventricular bigeminy, with every other beat being a premature ventricular complex.

Underlying sinus P waves continue throughout the tracing, confirming PVCs rather than aberrantly conducted PACs.

In this case, the PVCs provided more incriminating evidence of acute ischemia than sinus-conducted beats.

Learning Points

Single-lead clarity can be critical when artifact is present.

ST depression in lead III should prompt scrutiny for reciprocal ST elevation in aVL.

ECG artifact should always prompt immediate repeat ECG acquisition.

Dynamic comparison of ECGs is essential.

Premature ventricular complexes may reveal ischemic changes more clearly than sinus beats.

Subacute occlusion myocardial infarction may already have extensive myocardial damage at presentation.