=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Chest pain 6 days after a negative stress test - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:11.095929",
  "file_size_bytes": 9680105,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Chest pain 6 days after a negative stress test - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Steve Smith onAugust 1, 2025
Chest pain 6 days after a
negative stress test
This case comes from Cody Pinnow, a 2nd year EM resident
who learned EKGs from this blog while working as a cardiac

monitor technician, before medical school.
A previously healthy 70 something y.o presented to the ER
with 1 hour of dull, retrosternal chest pain radiating to the left
shoulder. He reports no cardiac history and actually
underwent a stress test (unclear type) 6 days prior, which
was normal. The patient was given a clean bill of health by
his cardiologist.
An ECG was obtained at time 0000, no priors were available.
What do you think?
= = =
This ECG was triaged as “No STEMI” and the patient was
placed in a room. The patientʼs doctor recognized the ECG as

 1/14
being concerning for OMI, most notably a hyperacute T wave
in V2, less so in V3 and V4.
Smith: there may be the beginnings of reperfusion: you can
see some terminal T-wave inversion in V3 and V4. I would
ask the patient if the pain is improving.
Retrospectively, the ECG was ran through the Queen, who
agrees.
New PMcardio for Individuals App 3.0 now includes
the latest Queen of Hearts model and AI explainability (blue
heatmaps)! Download now for iOS or Android.

On evaluation, the patient had continued 8/10 pain. The
patient was loaded with aspirin and given sublingual
nitroglycerin. With improving pain, a repeat ECG was obtained
at time 0058.
V2 appears less hyperacute, and there are now terminal T-
wave inventions in V3-V5, suggestive of reperfusion and
consistent with the patientʼs history of improving ACS
symptoms.
The Queen again recognizes this as high confidence OMI,
without having any information on the patientʼs pain.
 2/14
Smith: this version of the Queen diagnoses “OMI” if there is
either an “Active” OMI or a “Reperfused” OMI.
We have a more up-to-date algorithm (not publicly available)
that differentiates “Active” from “reperfused” and also
diagnoses “Subendocardial Ischemia (SEI)”
Here is the output of this algorithm:
Screenshot
= = =
A nitroglycerin drip was started and interventional cardiology
was called. Interventional agreed with the dynamic changes,
however requested the patientʼs cardiology group be
consulted before the catheterization was performed given the
recent reassuring stress test. The patientʼs pain continued to
improve on nitroglycerin.
As discussed on this blog previously, stress tests are
practically USELESS for emergency department risk
stratification of chest pain.
Stress tests have not been shown to catch at risk
plaques:
1. Smith SW. Jackson E. Hanson K. Bart B. Incidence of MI
in ED Chest Pain Patients with a Recent Negative Stress
Imaging Test. Academic Emergency Medicine 2005;
12(Suppl 5):51.
2. Walker J, Galuska M, Vega D. Coronary disease in
emergency department chest pain patients with recent
negative stress testing. West J Emerg Med. 2010
 3/14
Sep;11(4):384-8. Erratum in: West J Emerg Med. 2018
Nov;19(6):1065. doi: 10.5811/westjem.2018.10.41206.
PMID: 21079714; PMCID: PMC2967694.
3. Meyer MC, Mooney RP, Sekera AK. A critical pathway for
patients with acute chest pain and low risk for short-term
adverse cardiac events: role of outpatient stress testing.
Annals of emergency medicine. 2006; 47(5):427-35.
PMID
4. Engineer RS, et al. Chest pain after recent stress test: Is
there a warranty?
1. Ann Emerg Med 2004;44(4, Supplement):S47.
2. Available from:

Stress tests have bad sensitivity for obstructive
CAD, as low as 45%:
1. Froelicher VF, Lehmann KG, Thomas R, et al. The
electrocardiographic exercise test in a population with
reduced workup bias: diagnostic performance,
computerized interpretation, and multivariable prediction.
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study in Health Services
#016 (QUEXTA) Study Group. Quantitative Exercise
Testing and Angiography. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:(12
Pt 1)965-74
An excellent review of the pitfalls and weaknesses of stress
tests from an emergency department perspective:

Back to the Case:
The patientʼs primary cardiologist recommended obtaining a
troponin to help decide on catheterization “as the initial ECG
was relatively unremarkable”. The initial high-sensitivity
troponin returned at 92 (upper limit for men 22) which
convinced the cardiology teams that catheterization was
appropriate. The patient was started on heparin and went for
catheterization (pain free) at time 0400. He was found to
have severe triple vessel disease including 50% stenosis of
the left main, complex stenosis of various parts of the LAD
with 80% stenosis of the distal LAD. No immediate culprit
lesion was identified.
Peak Troponin was not measured.
Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted and the patient
successfully underwent CABG x4 the following day. The
troponin was not trended further. Patientʼs hospital course
 4/14
was complicated by atrial fibrillation and volume overload,
however he is now doing well.
An ECG several months later for comparison makes the
hyperacute changes of his first ECG more obvious.
Smith: this patient was lucky to reperfuse before any
intervention. You donʼt know which patients will be so lucky
— so donʼt wait for it to happen!!
= = =
======================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD (8/1/2025):
As I reviewed todayʼs case in the comfort of my Department) with “1 hour of dull, retrosternal CP (Chest
Pain)radiating to the left shoulder”.
Of note, the patient underwent a stresstest (unclear
type) 6 days earlier — which was reported as “normal”.
He was therefore “given a clean bill of health” by his
cardiologist.
= = =
The “Details” in this History:
As noted above in Dr. Smithʼs discussion — Interventional
cardiology was called to see this patient, but was reluctant to
perform cardiac catheterization despite ECG changes
because of the “reassuring” stress test. As one who
performed and taught residents and my colleague family
physicians nationally how to perform stress testing over a
period of decades — Iʼll add the following perspective
regarding the use of “stress testing”.
 5/14
Detail #1: There are many different kinds of “stress
tests” that might have been performed — so decision-
making will clearly depend on the specific type of stress
test that was done (ie, treadmill exercise — echo stress
— nuclear stress test — cardiac MRI, etc.).
Detail #2: What were the specific results of the test? For
example — an exercise treadmill test might be “negative
for ischemia” — but if an insufficient exercise workload
was achieved, significant cardiac disease may still be
present. Or body habitus or other factors may have
resulted in a “negative” but suboptimally visualized test.
Detail #3:WHY was a stress test ordered in the 1st
place, just 6 days before this patient presented with
new-onset CP? If the reason was for a history of angina
— then depending on the type of stress test and its
specific results — a “negative” result might not have
negated the risk of underlying heart disease. There is an
“art” to the interpretation of various stress tests that may
(or may not) have been optimally applied in todayʼs case
(We simply do not know this from details available
regarding todayʼs case).
Detail #4: Most stress tests assess for the presence of
flow-limiting coronary stenosis. But a majority of infarcts
arise from non-flow-limiting (less severe) coronary
stenoses that harbor an unstable plaque that ruptures
and results in acute coronary occlusion (Fearson —
Circulation: Cardiovasc Interven 4(6): 539-541, 2011).
While stress testing may highlight certain patients “at
risk” of a future event — it will generally not pick up
whether a plaque is about to become “unstable”.
The “Details” in Todayʼs ECGs:
For clarity in Figure-1 — Iʼve placed side-by-side the first 2
ECGs in todayʼs case.
The initial ECG (TOP tracing in Figure-1) — was
classified in triage as, “No STEMI”. The treating
physician did however recognize the hyperacuteT
wave in lead V2(less so in leads V3,V4).
About an hour later — the patient was doing
better (much less CP after ASA and SL followed by IV
NTG). A repeat ECG was obtained — and it was noted
that lead V2 looked less hyperacute, with now terminal T
wave inversions in leads V3,V4,V5.
Disposition: At this point — Cardiology recommended
obtaining a Troponin “to help decide on
catheterization” — as theinitialECGwas“relatively
unremarkable”.
 6/14
What additional details should be noted in the interpretation
of ECGs #1 and #2?
How should these details have influenced management
decisions?
= = =
Figure-1: Comparison of the initial ECG — and
the repeat ECG in todayʼs case.
ANSWERS: The details in the interpretation of these 2 ECGs
Given the history of new-onset CP in this 70-something man
— the diagnosis of acute OMI should have been made as
soon asECG #1 was seen.
The rhythm in ECG #1 is sinus. There is LAHB. But in a
patient with new-onset CP — our “eye” is captured by
the 2 leads within the RED rectangle. The hyperacute T
wave in lead V2 is large enough (and “fat” enough) to
swallow the small QRS complex in this lead.
Support that hyperacuity in lead V2 is real — is
forthcoming from the ST-T wave in lead V3, which
shows distinct straightening of the ST segment
takeoff and subtle-but-real terminal T wave inversion.
Similar findings of concern are seen in other leads
in ECG #1. These include: i) ST segment
straightening (in leads V4,V5 — with ST segment
flattening in lead V6) — and, ii) Terminal T wave
inversion (BLUE arrows in leads III,aVF; V4,V5).
Impression: Given the history — ECG #1 is diagnostic of
an acute OMI, with clear ST-T wave abnormalities in at
 7/14
least 7/12 leads. The terminalT wave inversion that is
seen in 5 leads suggests there has been some degree
of spontaneous reperfusion of the “culprit” artery. But
what spontaneously reopens — might just as easily (at
any moment) spontaneously reclose — which is
why prompt cath is indicatedon the basis of this initial
ECG. Regardless of what an initial Troponin might show
— prompt cath is indicated!
PEARL: In isolation — I might not be certain that the
inverted T waves in leads III and aVF
represent reperfusion T waves (because the T wave
may at times be normally inverted when the QRS is
predominantly negative in leads III and/or aVF, as it is in
ECG #1). However, the subtle-but-real T wave inversion
in leads V3,V4,V5 is important to appreciate because it
confirms reperfusion and that this patient has an acute
evolving OMI.
Learning Point:
Isnʼt it much easier to appreciate the dynamic ST-T wave
changes in Figure-1 when we view the 2 tracings we are
comparing side-by-side?
Note that the patientʼs CP is much less at the time ECG
#2 was recorded. As a result — we should expect
improvement in this repeat ECG.
Although subtle — all 3 inferiorleads show signs
suggestive of reperfusion (ST flattening and beginning T
wave inversion in lead II — and deeper T inversion in
leads III,aVF).
The hyperacute T wave in lead V2 has clearly deflated.
The T waves in high-lateral leads I and aVL have both
improved (deflation of the T wave in lead I — and the T
wave in aVL is less pointed). Retrospectively — this
comparison suggests that lead I in ECG #1 was also a
hyperacute T wave.
ST-T wave morphology has evolved in leads
V3,V4,V5,V6 (ST segment straightening has evolved
into ST segment coving with deeper terminal T wave
inversion).
Impression: No less than 10/12 leads
show “dynamic” ST-T wave changes in ECG #2
compared to ECG #1. There can be no doubt that this
patient had an acute OMI — which fortunately is now
showing ST-T wave changes
of spontaneous reperfusion in 10/12 leads.
Learning Point: It should not be surprising that when
cardiac cath was finally performed (4 hours after the
 8/14
initial ECG) — that this patient did not have a “culprit”
lesion identified on cath. Thatʼs because the reason the
patient was completely pain-free at the time cath was
performed is (as ECGs #1 and #2 have told us) — that
there has been spontaneous reperfusion of whichever
of his multivessel disease arteries had been occluded,
but had reopened by the time cath was finally done.
Steve Smith onAugust 1, 2025
HYPERACUTE T-WAVES LAD REPERFUSION STRESS TEST
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
87-year-old with chest Accuracy of cath lab
pain activation decisions
for STEMI-equivalent
and mimic ECGs:
Physicians vs. AI
(PMcardio, queen of
hearts), and comment
by John Mandrola on
