=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:45.193944",
  "file_size_bytes": 16272030,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Dr. Smith's ECG Blog
Instructive ECGs in Emergency Medicine Clinical Content
Associate Editors:
— Pendell Meyers & Ken Grauer (2018)
— Jesse McLaren & Emre Aslanger (2022)
— Willy Frick (2024) — Sam Ghali (2025)
Home  Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG
Emerson Floyd onSeptember 13, 2025
Five Lessons from a
Misleading ECG
This was written by Emerson Floyd, with comments by Smith
I first saw this this ECG (#1) when I woke up to a text message
a fellow EM physician and friend between night shifts:
 
“I accepted this patient in transfer from a remote hospital
without a cath lab. Our IC said to hold on lytics based on the
ECG. Transferring doc was worried about left main occlusion
based on aVR. Sgarbossa+? I never saw the patient.”
Smith: see @PMCardio Queen of Hearts interpretation below.
The first things that caught my half-asleep eye were the
extreme axis, the totally upright complex in aVR and the
depressions in the inferior and lateral leads. “Looks bad,
somethingʼs off,” I thought sleepily and went back to bed.
When I woke up I looked again and recognized that the above 
constellation of findings represented OMI with arm lead
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 1/17
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
reversal: lead aVR and aVL had switched places, lead I was
inverted. When interpreted in this context the ECG was
diagnostic of proximal LAD or first diagonal occlusion.
I asked my friend for all the deidentified information about the
case they could provide.
80-year-old patient with HTN and HLD presented at 150 pm
for midsternal chest pain since noon.
The following ECG was obtained by EMS on scene,
confirming my initial impression:
This is diagnostic of proximal LAD or first diagonal occlusion.
In the limb leads, the most obvious changes are the inferior
reciprocal depressions and the elevation in aVL. There is also
elevation in V1 an V2 with depressions in V5 and V6
consistent with the “precordial swirl” pattern discussed by
Smith, Meyers, etc. Of note, obvious changes in lead I, a
component of the commonly taught “South African Flag”
mnemonic to recognize this injury pattern, are absent.
Smith: lead I has a depressed ST takeoff and a straight ST
segment, so it is doing its part in the SAF morphology, but
without ST elevation.
Unfortunately, the physician at this remote facility did not
recognize the lead reversal on ECG #1. His interpretation of
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 2/17
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
this ECG: “Was evaluated on arrival nontoxic and
hemodynamically stable she is mildly tachycardic at 113. EKG
shows ST elevation in aVR with diffuse ST depression
concerning for left main occlusive MI, lbbb with discordance.”
_______
Smith comment: STE in aVR with diffuse ST depression is
very often, but erroneously, attributed to left main occlusion.
It indicates widespread subendocardial ischemia and can be
a manifestation of left main insuffieciency, which MAY be an
indication for the cath lab, but it is not a manifestation of total
occlusion.
See this post on left main occlusion: How does Acute Total
Left Main Coronary occlusion present on the ECG?.
And this one on STE in aVR: Does ST Elevation in lead aVR
indicate acute coronary occlusion?
________
The interpreting physician was right to notice how concerning
the depressions were! But the depressions in all the
inferolateral leads were suggestive of a specifically injured
territory, not just the general subendocardial ischemia
suggested by elevation in aVR with depression in II, V5 and
V6. They were also incorrect to diagnose left bundle branch
block. As noted by K. Wang and others, LBBB requires
monophasic R waves in I, avL and V6.
Smith: OMI can be diagnosed on the first ECG even if you
donʼt recognize the lead reversal. Also, whether it is LBBB or
Non-specific intraventricular conduction delay, the
concordant ST Elevation (see aVR and aVL) still is diagnostic.
And so none of this matters to the Queen of Hearts.
New PMcardio for Individuals App 3.0 now includes
the latest Queen of Hearts model and AI explainability (blue
heatmaps)! Download now for iOS or
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 3/17
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Android. https://www.powerfulmedical.com/pmcardio-
individuals/ (Drs. Smith and Meyers trained the AI Model and
are shareholders in Powerful Medical).
The patient got aspirin en route. The physician obtained
consent for TNK based on the patientʼs appearance and their
concern for left main occlusion based on seemingly
widespread depressions and STE in aVR. But, after reviewing
the ECG, the Interventional Cardiologist at the outside hospital
asked the ED physician not to give lytics, instead
recommending heparin and transfer. On a second discussion,
the interventional cardiologist asked for a CT angiogram to
assess for dissection prior to transfer.
Smith comment: only approximately 1% of “STEMI” (a subset of OMI
which meet STEMI mm critieria) are due to dissection. To take the time
to get a CT is detrimental to patient care. Use bedside ultrasound to
look for dissection, and learn how to do so. I This study showed very
high sensitivity and specificity of bedside ultrasound for Aortic
dissection.See this case here from 3 days ago: A very elderly
woman with sudden severe chest pain radiating to her back.
As the patient had continuing chest pain, an additional ECG
was obtained an hour and a half after the first:
The same lead reversal pattern was present on this ECG. This
was read as “EKG shows ST elevation in aVR with diffuse ST
depression concerning for left main occlusive MI, LBBB with
discordance.”
What strikes me on this repeat ECG is how the LAD territory
injury in the precordial leads has even more obvious “swirl”,
with deepened reciprocal depressions in V5 and V6
compared to prior. In an 80 year old female, both this and the
initial “misleading” ECG met STEMI criteria: about 1.7 mm in
V1 and 2 mm in V2. If the Emergency Physician hadnʼt
anchored on aVR elevation as the most telling marker of injury
they may have made a persuasive argument despite failing to
recognize lead misplacement.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 4/17
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Smith: V1 and V2 also have hyperacute T-waves, confirming
the diagnosis of precordial swirl. Precordial swirl is due to
occlusion proximal to the septal perforator. South Africa flag
sign is due to occlusion of D1 or LAD proximal to D1. So this is
going to be an occlusion of the LAD proximal to BOTH.
The patientʼs transfer was held while awaiting the final read
on the CT angiogram. Her high sensitivity troponin returned at
1981 ng/L (normal <50) at 1400. At 1600, the angiogram was
read as without dissection and the patient was transferred to
the outside hospital.
Upon arrival at the outside hospital the patient was pain free.
In keeping with this history, the biphasic, terminally inverted t-
wave in lead aVL on arrival around 2000 suggests some
degree of reperfusion:
Smith: and T-waves are no longer hyperacute. There is an
inverted reperfusion T-wave in aVL and reciprocally upright
T-waves in inferior leads.
Her troponin at 2111 resulted at 53.8 ng/mL (normal < 0.34
ng/mL), nearly triple the initial value if roughly comparing
these different troponin assays.
Smith: 53.8 ng/mL is a VERY large infarction.
The interventional cardiologist was spoken to upon the
patientʼs arrival. He opted to wait until the next day to
catheterize the patient, who remained chest pain free until
this procedure at about 1000:
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 5/17
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
with the following interventions performed:
Indeed, the lesion is proximal to BOTH the septal perforator
and D1.
Her ECG post-cath demonstrated further LAD reperfusion,
with a symmetrically inverted t-wave in aVL and a biphasic,
terminally inverted t-waves in V2:
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 6/17
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
The post-cath echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection
fraction of 40% with a hypokinetic to akinetic anteroseptum
and a hypokinetic mid to anterior apical wall and inferoapex.
Five Lessons from this Case:
This is an unfortunate case where the patient likely lost an
unnecessary amount of myocardial function secondary to
ECG interpretation mistakes by both an Emergency Physician
and an Interventional Cardiologist. But it contains many
lessons that others can learn from. I have picked out five.
Smith: Fortunately for the patient, there was spontaneous
reperfusion, aided by aspirin and heparin. But this reperfusion
was only AFTER a large amount of permanent, irreversible
myocardial loss.
Lesson 1: always review ECGs in context of priors. Lead
misplacement may have been correctly diagnosed if the EMS
strip on arrival was compared to the initial ECG obtained in
the ED. For all I know it actually was. Which leads to:
Lesson 2: learn to identify limb lead misplacement. I cover a
method for catching lead misplacement in the first lecture I
give to my residents and other learners every year. I teach it
right after I teach the elements of a normal sinus rhythm: it is
that critical and fundamental a skill. Just in terms of
diagnosing OMI, both false negatives and false positives can
be generated by lead misplacement. For instance, Dr. Jesse
McLaren shares a case on Emergency Medicine Cases
where a patient underwent unnecessary catheterization
based on the following left arm/right leg lead reversal ECG:
The ECG with corrected placement looks like this:
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 7/17
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Many ECG interpretation experts I know can instantly
recognize and categorize limb lead misplacement. However, I
do not have that expectation of most experienced Emergency
Attending Physicians, let alone a fourth-year medical student
or EM intern that Iʼm teaching. Accordingly, I teach the
following “cues” to identify some form of limb lead
misplacement and prompt a carefully recorded repeat ECG:
1. Upright p and qrs in aVR
2. Inverted pʼs in other leads
3. “Flat line” tracing in a lead
4. Extreme axis
While difficult to appreciate, the initial ECG in this case
demonstrates “1. Upright p and qrs in aVR”, “2. inverted pʼs in
(I and avL)” and “4. Extreme Axis.”
Lesson 3. Lead I in the high lateral “South African Flag” injury
pattern is not always obviously changed.
Letʼs assume that the prehospital ECG was repeated in the ED
and looks similar. Just the precordial leads alone would
prompt a typical reader of this blog to have a high suspicion
for “precordial swirl.” But on this whole this ECG suggests the
“South African Flag” pattern as it is often taught to medical
students and EM trainees: ST elevation in I and avl, ST
depression in lead III and ST elevation in V2.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 8/17
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
(Above figure courtesy of Ken Grauer via
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/a-woman-in-her-30s-with-
sudden-chest/)
I have seen multiple cases where the changes in lead I are not
as obvious as the changes in the other named “South African
Flag” leads. And this can lead to a delayed or missed proximal
LAD or D1 occlusion diagnosis because there arenʼt clear
“contiguous” leads to support a territorial injury. The lesson: It
is important to understand aVL and the septal leads as
“contiguous leads” corresponding to a proximal LAD or first
diagonal territory. In terms of the “South African Flag”
mnemonic, the top left portion of the flag can often be subtle.
Lesson 4: Learn the necessary elements of a Left Bundle
Branch Block
The intial ECGs in this case are indeed wide complex, with
QRS durations in some leads over 120 ms. But it is not a left
bundle branch block. As noted above, a left bundle branch
block ECG must have monophasic R waves in leads I, aVL and
V6.
Lesson 5: Understand aVR and the “demand pattern.”
I teach aVR to my trainees as “the great reciprocal.” This is
the one lead that does not “overlie” ventricular myocardium.
Accordingly, elevation or depression in this lead does provide
information about ischemia in one specific myocardial
territory. Rather, elevation in this lead is reciprocal to
widespread depression with an ST depression vector towards
II and V5, particularly in what I call as the “demand
distribution”: in subendocardial ischemia without a clear
territorial culprit, maximum ST depression will often be
observed in leads II, V5 and V6. Some cases on this blog and
elsewhere demonstrate this pattern in association with a left
main or proximal LAD plaque rupture in patients with very
robust collateral circulation. But the picture this ECG paints is
not one of a particular territory abruptly deprived of
oxygenation. Rather – absent any other localizing features – it
is one of global demand ischemia that can be seen in any
kind of shock, from sepsis to GI bleed. If not a baseline
finding (which can be the case with LVH), I teach residents
that this pattern should trigger a consideration of someone
who is 1) in shock and very sick and 2) in need of careful
thought about what is causing them to be in shock.
However, since elevation in this lead is not diagnostic of
transmural ischemia, it would not in my opinion be sufficient
to satisfy the Sgarbossa criteria based on concordant
elevation in one lead.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 9/17
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Smith: when leads are correctly placed, aVR is virtually
always predominantly negative, including in LBBB. So, in
LBBB, ST elevation cannot be concordant. But it CAN be
proportionally excessively discordant, and when it is, it is
reciprocal to widespread ST depression, just as in normal
conduction. And if it is very discordant (>30%), one could
diagnose OMI if it is the correct clinical scenario (not demand
ischemia)
Final thoughts:
A challenge of Emergency Medicine is that the care patients
receive by specialists is often only as good as the case the
Emergency Physician makes. In retrospect, the emergency
physician who had the benefit of a bedside encounter with
the patient seemed to be convinced that she was having a
heart attack. He tried to render good care, consenting the
patient for lytics and calling the interventional cardiologist
twice about potentially giving them. But by anchoring on an
incorrect interpretation of the ECG – Left Bundle Branch
Block, Sgarbossa + based on aVR rather than high lateral
injury with arm lead misplacement with STEMI+ septal injury
with lateral precordial reciprocals – he failed to make a
sufficient case for lytics to an interventional cardiologist.
======================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD
(9/13/2025):
In todayʼs post — Dr. Floyd expands on a series of oversights,
beginning with the initialECG that was texted to him.
Assessment of this initial tracing was complicated by LA-RA
Lead Reversal, that significantly altered the appearance of
limb leads in this tracing.
I focus My Comment on this initial ECG — first by quick
review on what alterations in ECG appearance to expect
with LA-RA Lead Reversal (See Figure-1) — and then
with illustration in Figure-2 as to what todayʼs initial
tracing would have looked like had the leads been
properly placed.
My favorite on-line “Quick GO-TO”reference for the most
common types of lead misplacement comes from LITFL
( = Life-In-The-Fast-Lane). I have used the superb web page
they post in their web site on this subject for years.
Itʼs EASY to find — Simply put in, “LITFL Lead Reversal” in
the Search bar — and the link comes up instantly.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 10/17
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
This LITFL web page describes the 7 most common lead
reversals. There are other possibilities (ie, in which there
may be misplacement of multiple leads) — but these are
less common and more difficult to predict.
By far (!) — the most commonlead reversal is mix-up of
the LA (Left Arm) and RA (Right Arm) electrodes. This is
the mix-up that occurred inECG #1a. For clarity in
Figure-1 — Iʼve reproduced the illustration from
LITFL on LA-RA reversal.
KEY Point: LA-RA Lead Reversal is EASY to recognize
when you see “global negativity” in lead I (ie, When the
P wave, QRS complex and T wave are all negative in
lead I ). Even when P waves are absent (or P waves in
lead V1 are tiny — as in todayʼs case) — a completely
negative QRS complex in lead I is almost never seen in
a supraventricular rhythm!
NOTE: Iʼve collected and organized over 20 examples of
lead reversals (as well as many additional examples of
various “technical misadventures) that are important to
recognize. This guide can be easily accessed from the
Menu Tab at the top of every page in Dr. Smithʼs ECG
Blog — Simply CLICK HERE—
= = =
Figure-1: LA-RA Lead Reversal (adapted fromLITFL).
= = =
Applying Figure-1 to Todayʼs CASE:
For clarity — Iʼve taken the initialECG in todayʼs case ( = ECG
#1a) — and inverted lead I — switched leads II and III —
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 11/17
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
and switched leads aVL and aVR ( = ECG #1b, which is the
lower tracing inFigure-2).
Note that the “telltale findings” of LA-RA Lead Reversal
( = global negativity of P wave, QRS and T wave in lead I
— and the all upright QRS in lead aVR) are no longer
present in ECG#1b.
Now that the appearance of the QRST complex in todayʼs
initial ECG is as it would have been had the LA and RA
electrodes been properly placed — we can more easily
interpret from ECG #1bthe principal findings of this initial
tracing:
There is sinus tachycardia.
The QRS complex is widened — but as per Dr. Floyd,
rather than LBBB, the persistent deep S waves in the
lateral chest leads is most consistent with IVCD
(IntraVentricular Conduction Defect) with a marked left
axis (predominant QRS negativity in all 3 inferior leads).
The abnormalST elevation in lead V1 — and
disproportionately enlarged ST-T wave in neighboring
lead V2 — together with shelf-like ST depression in
lead V6 (and to a lesser extent in leads V4,V5) in this
80-year old patient with new CP (Chest Pain) are
strongly suggestive of Precordial “Swirl“ from a
proximal LAD occlusion.
This impression is supported in ECG #1b by the limb lead
findings of: i) ST elevation in lead aVL and lead I; —
and, ii) Reciprocal ST depression in each of the inferior
leads.
Of note is terminal T wave inversion in lead aVL, with
terminal T wave positivity in the inferior leads — that
may represent a component of spontaneous
reperfusion.
To Emphasize: The ST elevation in lead aVL that so
often accompanies (and supports our diagnostic
impression of)proximalLAD occlusion — was not
identifiable on todayʼs initial ECG because of the LA-RA
Lead Reversal.
= = =
Figure-2: Iʼve reproduced todayʼs initial ECG — and in the
bottom tracing, have corrected for what this initial ECG would
look like if the leads were correctly placed. (To improve
visualization — Iʼve digitized these tracings using PMcardio).
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 12/17
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Emerson Floyd onSeptember 13, 2025
LEAD MISPLACEMENT PRECORDIAL SWIRL
SOUTH AFRICAN FLAG SIGN
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
A very elderly woman Chest pain and a very
with sudden severe wide RBBB
chest pain radiating to
her back
SEARCH
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 13/17
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
ABOUT
Dr. Smith
FACULTY PHYSICIAN
Dr. Stephen W. Smith is a faculty physician in the Emergency
Medicine Residency at Hennepin County Medical Center
(HCMC) in Minneapolis, MN, and Professor of Emergency
Medicine at the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Smith's Google Scholar Profile
Dr. Smith Articles on PubMed
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
FOLLOW US ON X (TWITTER)
Follow @smithECGBlog Follow @PendellM Follow @ekgpress
Follow @AslangerE Follow @ecgcases Follow @PMcardioBot
Follow @EM_RESUS
FEATURED POSTS
 
‘NSTEM
‘NSTEMIʼ or reperfused OMI? An
OMI? And which lesion is the Jesse McLaren the culp
culprit?
onFebruary 8, 2025
BLOG ARCHIVE
Select Month
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 14/17
--- Страница 15 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
LABELS
"inferior" ST depression(24) anterior STEMI equation(14)
anterior T wave inversion(15) atrial flutter(31) AV block(17)
aVL(31) aVR(30) Benign T-wave Inversion(23)
cardiac arrest(57)
cardiogenic shock(15) computer(21)
CT scan(13) de Winter's T-waves(25) Diffuse ST Depression(18)
Dr. K. Wang(20) early repolarization(22) echocardiogram(24)
false positive cath lab activation(49)
False positive ECG(24)
Formula for Early Repol vs. Anterior STEMI(39)
hyperacute T-waves(84)
hyperkalemia(65)
Hyperacute T-waves LAD(26)
hypokalemia(32) inferior hyperacute T-waves(24)
Inferior MI subtle(31)
inferoposterior STEMI(15)
LAD occlusion(112)
LAD occlusion vs. benign early repolarization
(43)
LBBB(55)
LAD OMI missed(19) LAD reperfusion(14)
lead misplacement(21) left bundle branch block(16) left main(24)
long QT(45) LV aneurysm(35) LVH(41)
LVH and OMI(14) missed OMI(33) missed STEMI(24)
modified sgarbossa criteria(38)
Morphine(14)
Myocarditis(21)
Normal ECG by computer algorithm(55)
OMI(149)
paced rhythm(24) Pediatric(16)
pericarditis(27)
PM Cardio Queen of Hearts(71)
posterior leads(22) posterior OMI(44)
posterior reperfusion T-waves(17) posterior STEMI(26)
Precordial swirl(38) prehospital ECG(20)
pseudoinfarction(23) pseudonormalization(24)
PseudoSTEMI(36) pulmonary embolism(30) PVC(15)
RBBB(50)
QOH(13) Queen knows false positive(14)
RBBB with LAFB (Left Anterior Fascicular Block)(20)
reperfusion(24) RVH(14) RV MI(21) serial ECG(35)
ST depression(40)
shark fin(14) spontaneous reperfusion(17)
subtle(41) Subtle LAD(50)
subendocardial ischemia(16)
Subtle LAD Occlusion(58)
Subtle STE(14)
Supraventricular Tachycardia (PSVT)(18) Syncope(34)
T-Wave inversion(26) takotsubo(24) terminal QRS distortion(17)
Thrombolytics(15) torsade(15) Transient OMI(14)
transient ST elevation(19) U-waves(24) ultrasound(19)
unstable angina(27) Ventricular Fibrillation(16)
ventricular tachycardia(30) Wellens' syndrome(31)
Wide complex tachycardia(46)
wide complex(16)
wide QRS(13) wide_complex_tachycardia(25)
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 15/17
--- Страница 16 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
wolff parkinson white WPW(24) wraparound LAD(15) young(19)
Young Women(19)
Read Next
Steve Smith onSeptember 15, 2025
Chest pain and a very wide RBBB
I was texted this ECG by a reader without any info: What do you
think? The readerʼs interpretation was this: “Patient…
Willy Frick onSeptember 18, 2025
Found down, CPR, pulse regained. Here is the ED ECG.
What is it?
A man in his 60s was found down in the park. Bystanders initiated
CPR, but when EMS arrived he had a pulse and it was not clear that
he had…
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 16/17
--- Страница 17 ---
22/01/2026, 15:22 Five Lessons from a Misleading ECG - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Steve Smith onSeptember 21, 2025
Several days of Shortness of breath. Other than the
obvious atrial flutter, can PMCardio AI make the crucial
diagnosis on the ECG?
A 70-something male with no significant past history presented to a
primary care clinic with some progressive SOB over weeks, much
worse over…
Never Miss a Beat – Join Our ECG
Insights Newsletter
Get the latest expert ECG cases, clinical pearls, and interpretation tips from Dr.
Smith delivered straight to your inbox—trusted by emergency physicians and
cardiologists worldwide.
Email Address Subscribe
Trusted insights, no spam—only ECG brilliance.
Expert ECG Interpretation and Emergency Cardiology
Education
© 2025 — Dr. Smith's ECG Blog. All Rights Reserved.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/five-lessons-from-a-misleading-ecg/ 17/17
