=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:35.542059",
  "file_size_bytes": 19398468,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Dr. Smith's ECG Blog
Instructive ECGs in Emergency Medicine Clinical Content
Associate Editors:
— Pendell Meyers & Ken Grauer (2018)
— Jesse McLaren & Emre Aslanger (2022)
— Willy Frick (2024) — Sam Ghali (2025)
Home  Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram
Willy Frick onDecember 26, 2025
Narrow complex
tachycardia, with interesting
 
laddergram
A woman in her late 70s presented with nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea. Her emergency department ECG is shown below:
ECG 1
What do you think?
This was interpreted as atrial flutter with 2:1 block. The
patient received metoprolol 5 mg IV and converted to sinus
rhythm.
ECG 2

https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 1/15
--- Страница 2 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Do we still believe the diagnosis of atrial flutter? Remember
that metoprolol has no ability to cardiovert atrial fibrillation
or flutter. It helps those patients by slowing conduction
through the AV node and preventing rapid ventricular rate, but
it does nothing for the underlying arrhythmia.
It is possible that a person could spontaneously convert after
receiving metoprolol, but it is more likely the rhythm was not
atrial flutter in the first place. Other possibilities for regular,
narrow complex tachycardia are the usual suspects —
AVNRT, AVRT, and atrial tachycardia. When you are
considering an SVT diagnosis, it is useful to compare the QRS
complexes between sinus rhythm and SVT to inspect for any
morphologic differences that could be concealing atrial
activity.
In this case, V3 is very useful to inspect side by side. Do you
see any differences?
Lead V3 side by side
One difference you might notice is the loss of R wave during
tachycardia. This may be due to differences in electrode
positioning (for example if the electrode was positioned
higher or more medial during tachycardia vs sinus). The other
difference is the terminally positive wave at the end of the
QRS.
V3 terminally positive deflection
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 2/15
--- Страница 3 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
This difference cannot be explained by lead positioning, and
the more likely explanation is that it reflects atrial activity. We
can prove it is not 2:1 activity by using marching calipers to
look for an additional P wave halfway in between those we
have identified above.
V3 with marching calipers
This finding is referred to as a “pseudo Rʼ.” It is
characteristically seen best in V1, but in this case we see it in
V3. It is strongly suggestive of typical AVNRT.
What is typical AVNRT? It is a supraventricular
tachyarrhythmia where the AV node contains a fast (regular)
pathway, and a slow pathway. Most of the time in patients
with dual AV nodes of this type, sinus beats arrive at the AV
node and enter BOTH pathways. The fast pathway wins the
race through the node, and depolarizes the ventricles via the
His-Purkinje system (HPS). The slow pathway arrives a bit
later when the HPS is refractory, and has no effect on the
ECG.
Back to the case:
The patient was started on amiodarone and therapeutic
anticoagulation, and discharged with outpatient follow up.
Several days later, she presented with dizziness. ECG showed
junctional bradycardia with heart rate in the 30s. Amiodarone
was held and she was admitted.
On review of her telemetry, her heart rate trend showed an
abrupt change. The heart rate trend line is a very powerful
tool to find interesting portions of telemetry, especially when
there are abrupt rate changes.
Telemetry with abrupt rate change
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 3/15
--- Страница 4 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
The rhythm at this change is shown below. Have a look and
see if you can explain it to yourself before scrolling further.
Rhythm change
Here is my interpretation with a ladder diagram. Please note
that this is just one educated guess. There are other possible
reasonable interpretations.
Explanation in words:
The first four beats are junctional escape beats which
conduct antegrade into the ventricle, and retrograde up
the fast pathway (green). They also conduct up the slow
pathway (orange), but since the fast pathway wins the
race, the atrium is refractory and there is no evidence of
slow pathway conduction on surface ECG. In the
language of EP, we call this “concealed conduction.”
All of a sudden, the atrium spits out a few beats, P
waves 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Probably a burst of ectopic atrial
tachycardia (i.e. a few consecutive PACs).
P5 conducts rapidly down the fast pathway giving
rise to a ventricular beat. It also conducts down the
slow pathway but loses the race.
P6 comes quickly, and as a result, the fast pathway
(green) is refractory, hence it conducts to the
ventricle via the slow pathway (orange) with long
PR.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 4/15
--- Страница 5 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
P7-9 conduct similarly, but with decrement each
beat. This is normal physiologic AV node behavior.
The faster that impulses arrive, the slower it
conducts.
After P9, we donʼt see any additional UPRIGHT P waves
originating from the atrium. Instead, P9 conducts VERY
slowly down the slow pathway (the PR is longer than the
RR!). By the time it finally arrives at the bottom of the AV
node and conducts to the ventricle, the fast pathway has
recovered, and this initiates re-entry.
Since the total rate is less than 100, you cannot even call this
atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia. Instead, this is
atrioventricular nodal reentrant arrhythmia.
This patient went for EP study, and was proven to have easily
inducible AVNRT in lab, which was successfully ablated.
Learning points:
Compare the QRS in sinus rhythm and SVT for any
subtle differences which may reflect atrial activity, in
particular the “pseudo R prime.”
The heart rate trend line on telemetry is very helpful for
learning arrhythmia mechanisms by studying onset and
termination.
Abrupt termination of a narrow complex with AV nodal
blockers strongly favors node-dependent tachycardia,
e.g. AVNRT or AVRT.
= = =
======================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD
(12/26/2025):
Regular readers of My Comments in Dr. Smithʼs ECG Blog
know that I often cite this quote by Rosenbaum — “Every
self-respecting arrhythmia has at least 3 possible
interpretations.” Todayʼs case certainly qualifies as
displaying several “self-respecting” ( =challenging)
arrhythmias — for which Iʼll offer another perspective to that
provided above by Dr. Frick in his excellent discussion..
= = =
MYThoughts on the Initial Rhythm:
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 5/15
--- Страница 6 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
For clarity in Figure-1 — Iʼve reproduced the initial ECG —
with the repeat tracing below it (recorded after 5 mg IV
Metoprolol successfully converted the rhythm to sinus).
I interpreted ECG #1 as showing a regular SVT
(SupraVentricular Tachycardia)rhythm at ~135/minute,
but without clear sign of sinus P waves. This description
should prompt the usual differential diagnosis of: i)
Sinus tachycardia (highly unlikelyin Figure-1, since the
upright deflection in the middle of the R-R interval in
lead II looks to be a T wave; It would be very unusual for
there to be such a long PR interval in sinus tachycardia
when the rate is this fast); — ii) AFlutter (which it is not
— as per the above demonstration by Dr. Frick that none
of the 12 leads demonstrate any sign of 2:1 AV
conduction); — iii) ATach (Atrial Tachycardia) — which
might be possible (albeit this would entail a very long PR
interval); — or, iv) A reentry SVT (ie, either AVNRT or
orthodromic AVRT — depending on whether the reentry
circuit was contained within the AV Node, or extended
beyond the AV Node with inclusion of an Accessory
Pathway).
I suspected the answer was iv) = a reentry SVT — with
the KEY to further distinction between AVNRT vs
orthodromic AVRT residing with whether retrograde
atrial activity might be present, and if so — the nature
of such atrial activity.
KEY Point: In general — retrograde P waves are
recognized by the presence of negative deflections in
one or more of the inferior leads (II,III,aVF) that occur
after the QRS complex. With AVNRT (in which the
reentry circuit is entirely contained within the AV Node)
— the RPʼ interval ( = distance from the QRS until the
retrograde P wave) tends to be very short, such that we
either do not see retrograde negative deflections
(because they are “concealed” within the QRS) or we
see retrograde P waves occurring at the very end of the
QRS (often distorting the S wavein lead II, III and/or
aVF).
In contrast — with orthodromic AVRT (in which the
complete path of the reentry circuit will be greater
becausethe circuit extends outside of the AV Node to
include a portion of an AP) — there tends to be a longer
RPʼ interval, in which the negative retrograde deflection
will usually be seen after the end of the QRS, within the
ST segment. Exceptions exist! — but the above
generalities with respect to the length of the RPʼ interval
often provide an insightful clue as to whether or not the
patient is likely to have a “concealed” AP that
participates in the retrograde limb of a reentry SVT
rhythm.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 6/15
--- Страница 7 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
So how do we know if the tiny deflections that we see during
a fast SVT rhythm represent retrogradeP waves?
The best way to tell — is to scrutinize the QRS complex
in the repeat ECG obtained after conversion to sinus
rhythm, to see if the deflections we were questioning
during the SVT are no longer seen. This is where the
long lead II rhythm strips at the bottom of each tracing in
Figure-1 are so helpful — because they provide us with
multiple consecutive beats that reveal what was
happening in lead II.
As suggested in the magnified insert view in lead II of
ECG #1 — I thought there was a biphasic retrograde P
wave(REDarrow highlighting a small initial pointed
upright deflection immediately after the QRS — followed
by a BLUE arrow highlighting a wider negative
deflection seen just before the T wave). To Emphasize: I
was not at all certain about what I was seeing — as
biphasic retrograde P waves are rare, and baseline
artifact complicated my assessment.
That said — I thought that if the positive RED arrow
deflection after the QRS was not part of a retrograde P
wave — then the RPʼ interval of theBLUE arrow
negative deflection would still be longer than what I
would expect with AVNRT(in which the reentry circuit
is entirely contained within the AV Node).
To Also Emphasize! — None of what I describe above
affects initial management of this patient, since
regardless of whether the rhythm in ECG #1 turns out to
be AVNRT or orthodromic AVRT — treatment with vagal
maneuvers, adenosine, verapamil/diltiazem, and/or a ß-
blocker should be equally appropriate and effective.
But I think it insightful to get as close as possible to a
definitive rhythm diagnosis that may assist with longterm
management decisions.
To Summarize: We know that biphasic retrograde P
waves are rare, but when they occur, they are most
often associated with participation of a concealed AP in
the reentry circuit (Ching-Tai Tai et al — JACC 29(2):
394-402, 1997). And, even if the retrograde P wave in
ECG #1 was the single negative BLUE arrow deflection in
Figure-1 — the RPʼ interval is longer than usual for
AVNRT — which is why I suspected orthodromic AVRT
in a patient with a concealed AP as the etiology of the
SVT rhythm in ECG #1.
P.S.: The rhythm in ECG #2 is now sinus — but the rate
of this sinus rhythm after treatment with IV Metoprolol is
slow ( = sinus bradycardia at ~55/minute). Not seeing
any additional 12-lead post-conversion tracings on this
patient in her late 70s — if this degree of bradycardia
persisted at the time of her discharge from the hospital,
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 7/15
--- Страница 8 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
one would have to wonder if the patient might not have a
“Tachy-Brady” form of SSS(Sick Sinus Syndrome) —
with her “tachy” component ( = the reentry SVT rhythm)
exacerbated by rate-slowing medication ( = the IV ß-
blocker).
= = =
Figure-1: Comparison between the initial ECG — and the
repeat ECG recorded after conversion to sinus rhythm.
= = =
What Happened Next?
As per Dr. Frickʼs above discussion — this 70+ year old
woman was discharged from the hospital on Amiodarone,
with plan for outpatient follow-up. Several days later, she
returned to the hospital with dizziness and marked
bradycardia — with the trend analysisand telemetry tracing
shown in Figure-2 that I have reproduced from Dr. Frickʼs
presentation:
As per Dr. Frick — Telemetry monitoring showed
persistent bradycardia in the 40s lasting for hours —
until a sudden “spike” in heart rate up to ~90/minute,
with the fascinating rhythm strip recorded at the time of
this sudden rate and rhythm change ( = the multi-lead
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 8/15
--- Страница 9 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
rhythm strip shown below the trend analysis in Figure-
2).
KEY Point: Our suspicion of SSS is clearly increased by
review of the trend analysis and rhythm strip shown in
Figure-2. That said — SSS(and the need for permanent
pacing) can only be diagnosed after “fixable” causes of
alternating tachycardia-bradycardia have been ruled out
(ie, Withdrawal of the Amiodarone that this patient had
been placed on — as well as ruling out recent or
ongoing ischemia-infarction, hypothyroidism, sleep
apnea).
For more on SSS — See My Comment in the January
22, 2020 post in Dr. Smithʼs ECG Blog.
= = =
Figure-2: Trend analysis and telemetry tracing following
readmission to the hospital of todayʼs patient.
= = =
Another Laddergram Possibility …
Iʼll conclude my comments with another perspective on the
rhythm strip shown at the bottom of Figure-2 — for which Dr.
Frick provided his laddergram illustration in his above
discussion.
As per the Rosenbaum citation I started my comments
with — more than a single laddergram explanation may
be possible with complex arrhythmias, with final
validation often possible only by EP study.
I could be wrong — and Dr. Frickʼs laddergram may
more accurately predict the mechanism of this complex
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 9/15
--- Страница 10 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
arrhythmia. But I thought it interesting to discuss
another possibilty via my proposedladdergram that I
show in Figure-3.
NOTE: I put forth my laddergram theory that I show in
Figure-3 before I learned the results of EP Study that
confirmed AVNRT as the mechanism of this patientʼs
tachycardias.
The rhythm in my Figure-3 laddergram begins with the
bradycardia that we saw in the trend analysis from Figure-2. I
suspect the “MCL” label represents a right-sided monitoring
lead, such as MCL-1. Iʼve numbered the beats — and have
labeled P waves with small-case letters in this laddergram.
Beats #1-thru-4 show a junctional escape rhythm(ie, a
regular, narrow QRSrhythm without sinus P waves — at
a rate in the low 40s).
The terminal (pseudo-rʼ ) upright deflections in the first
4 QRS complexes are almost certain to represent
retrograde P waves(labeleda,b,c,d) — as retrograde P
waves in lead V1 are typically positive, and these
terminal positive deflections that we see in beats #1-
thru-4 are missing from conducted beats #5 and 8.
The light BLUE lines from these initial 4 beats
schematically represent tranmission of the impulse over
the AP(that I suspected was present from my
discussion ofFigure-1) — with this retrograde
conduction arising from the junctional escape focus in
the AV Nodal Tier.
There then follows a 5-beat run of ATach (P waves
labeled e,f,g,h,i ). As commonly occurs with runs of
ATach — there is Wenckebach conduction with
progressively increasing PR intervals until P wave “h” is
non-conducted. The cycle begins again with beat #8
that is conducted with a normal PR interval by P wave
“i”. This apparently primes conditions for initiation of the
reentrantnodalrhythm at ~90/minute for the duration
of the tracing (which as per Dr. Frick — is technically
“too slow” to qualify as AVRT — given the absence of
“Tachycardia”).
The light BLUE lines (beginning with beat #8) — once
again schematically represent active participation by the
concealed AP in the reentry circuit.
BOTTOM Line: Regardless of whether my laddergram or Dr.
Frickʼs laddergram is “correct” — todayʼs patient manifests
alternatingbrady-tachy rhythms suggestive of SSS
(pending what happens after Amiodarone is withdrawn).
= = =
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 10/15
--- Страница 11 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Figure-3: My proposed laddergram for the rhythm strip
shown in Figure-2.
= = =
= = =
Willy Frick onDecember 26, 2025
AVNRT AV NODAL RE-ENTRANT TACHYCARDIA LADDERGAM
PSEUDO R-WAVE SUPRAVENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA (PSVT)
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
A man in his 50s with OMI or Subendocardial
altered mental status Ischemia (SEI)?
and abdominal pain.
What treatment must
be given immediately,
and how much?
SEARCH
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 11/15
--- Страница 12 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
ABOUT
Dr. Smith
FACULTY PHYSICIAN
Dr. Stephen W. Smith is a faculty physician in the Emergency
Medicine Residency at Hennepin County Medical Center
(HCMC) in Minneapolis, MN, and Professor of Emergency
Medicine at the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Smith's Google Scholar Profile
Dr. Smith Articles on PubMed
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
FOLLOW US ON X (TWITTER)
Follow @smithECGBlog Follow @PendellM Follow @ekgpress
Follow @AslangerE Follow @ecgcases Follow @PMcardioBot
Follow @EM_RESUS
FEATURED POSTS
 
‘NSTEM
‘NSTEMIʼ or reperfused OMI? An
OMI? And which lesion is the Jesse McLaren the culp
culprit?
onFebruary 8, 2025
BLOG ARCHIVE
Select Month
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 12/15
--- Страница 13 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
LABELS
"inferior" ST depression(24) anterior STEMI equation(14)
anterior T wave inversion(15) atrial flutter(31) AV block(17)
aVL(31) aVR(30) Benign T-wave Inversion(23)
cardiac arrest(57)
cardiogenic shock(15) computer(21)
CT scan(13) de Winter's T-waves(25) Diffuse ST Depression(18)
Dr. K. Wang(20) early repolarization(22) echocardiogram(24)
false positive cath lab activation(49)
False positive ECG(24)
Formula for Early Repol vs. Anterior STEMI(39)
hyperacute T-waves(84)
hyperkalemia(65)
Hyperacute T-waves LAD(26)
hypokalemia(32) inferior hyperacute T-waves(24)
Inferior MI subtle(31)
inferoposterior STEMI(15)
LAD occlusion(112)
LAD occlusion vs. benign early repolarization
(43)
LBBB(55)
LAD OMI missed(19) LAD reperfusion(14)
lead misplacement(21) left bundle branch block(16) left main(24)
long QT(45) LV aneurysm(35) LVH(41)
LVH and OMI(14) missed OMI(33) missed STEMI(24)
modified sgarbossa criteria(38)
Morphine(14)
Myocarditis(21)
Normal ECG by computer algorithm(55)
OMI(149)
paced rhythm(24) Pediatric(16)
pericarditis(27)
PM Cardio Queen of Hearts(71)
posterior leads(22) posterior OMI(44)
posterior reperfusion T-waves(17) posterior STEMI(26)
Precordial swirl(38) prehospital ECG(20)
pseudoinfarction(23) pseudonormalization(24)
PseudoSTEMI(36) pulmonary embolism(30) PVC(15)
RBBB(50)
QOH(13) Queen knows false positive(14)
RBBB with LAFB (Left Anterior Fascicular Block)(20)
reperfusion(24) RVH(14) RV MI(21) serial ECG(35)
ST depression(40)
shark fin(14) spontaneous reperfusion(17)
subtle(41) Subtle LAD(50)
subendocardial ischemia(16)
Subtle LAD Occlusion(58)
Subtle STE(14)
Supraventricular Tachycardia (PSVT)(18) Syncope(34)
T-Wave inversion(26) takotsubo(24) terminal QRS distortion(17)
Thrombolytics(15) torsade(15) Transient OMI(14)
transient ST elevation(19) U-waves(24) ultrasound(19)
unstable angina(27) Ventricular Fibrillation(16)
ventricular tachycardia(30) Wellens' syndrome(31)
Wide complex tachycardia(46)
wide complex(16)
wide QRS(13) wide_complex_tachycardia(25)
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 13/15
--- Страница 14 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
wolff parkinson white WPW(24) wraparound LAD(15) young(19)
Young Women(19)
Read Next
Magnus Nossen onDecember 30, 2025
OMI or Subendocardial Ischemia (SEI)?
A 79-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and a benign
brain tumor was awakened by chest pain and dyspnea. She reported
having…
Steve Smith onJanuary 13, 2025
A 50-something man with Chest pain at triage
A 50-something male presented to triage with chest pain for one day.
An ECG was recorded quickly before any further history or physical
exam:…
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 14/15
--- Страница 15 ---
22/01/2026, 15:17 Narrow complex tachycardia, with interesting laddergram - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Willy Frick onFebruary 18, 2025
After seeing this ECG, are there any medications you
would consider giving?
Written by Willy Frick A man in his 50s with COPD presented with
dizziness and hypotension. He had worked overnight the night before
and…
Never Miss a Beat – Join Our ECG
Insights Newsletter
Get the latest expert ECG cases, clinical pearls, and interpretation tips from Dr.
Smith delivered straight to your inbox—trusted by emergency physicians and
cardiologists worldwide.
Email Address Subscribe
Trusted insights, no spam—only ECG brilliance.
Expert ECG Interpretation and Emergency Cardiology
Education
© 2025 — Dr. Smith's ECG Blog. All Rights Reserved.
https://drsmithsecgblog.com/narrow-complex-tachycardia-with-interesting-laddergram/ 15/15
