=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "Sometimes a patient is fortunate to have a cardiac arrest - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:51.608804",
  "file_size_bytes": 23741293,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/Sometimes a patient is fortunate to have a cardiac arrest - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Pendell Meyers onFebruary 2, 2025
Sometimes a patient is
fortunate to have a cardiac
arrest
Written by Pendell Meyers
A man in his 60s presented with acute chest pain.
Here is his triage ECG:
 
What do you think?
There is sinus rhythm with clear LVH. Leads V5-6 are suspicious for
upright, enlarged T waves that are possibly inappropriate for the QRS
complex, especially V6. But without a baseline for comparison, it
would be difficult for me to say that it is specific and diagnostic for
OMI. The Queen of Hearts agrees, calling the ECG not specific for
OMI.
Smith comment: V6 is very atypical for LVH and very suspicious for
OMI. There is a very high voltage R-wave without any S-wave 
(terminal QRS distortion) and with a concordant ST segment and T-
 1/13
wave, with convex ST segment. It is essential to compare with old
ECGs. In the absence of old ECGs, one must record serial ECGs
every 15 minutes.
He had several older ECGs on file, here are two examples:
6 days prior:
2 months prior:
In the context of ACS symptoms, and when able to compare the
new vs. old ECG, the top ECG is DIAGNOSTIC of OMI until proven
otherwise.
Unfortunately, the ECG was interpreted as no significant change
from prior, “no STEMI”!!
He was sent back to the waiting room, where he suffered a VF arrest.
Defibrillation was performed, and ROSC was achieved.
Approximately 5 minutes after ROSC, this ECG was obtained (about
45 minutes after arrival):
 2/13
Obvious anterolateral OMI, and STEMI criteria positive for
those who care or need it.
Smith comment: The patient was lucky to have a cardiac arrest.
Had he not had one, he would have sat in the waiting room until his
entire myocardium at risk infarcted. By undergoing an arrest,
providers became aware of his OMI which had not been noticed on
his diagnostic ECG, and he thus has a chance at some myocardial
salvage.
Also: notice how the LAD Occlusion results in DECREASED S-wave
amplitude, compared to the previous ECGs, in V2 and V3. I have
noticed that this nearly always happens, and is the reason that you
rarely find an ECG that shows BOTH LVH with high right precordial
amplitudes AND acute STEMI/OMI.
Total proximal LAD occlusion was found and stented at angiography
soon after the ECG above. Here are some images:
 3/13
Next morning ECG:
Reperfusion findings are clear..
 4/13
There is some R-wave preservation, a good sign that some
myocardium remains viable
Echocardiogram:
EF 15%
Severe global hypokinesis
Akinesis of basal-mid inferior and inferoseptal myocardium
Severe hypokinesis to akinesis of apical anteroseptal, anterior, and
inferoseptal myocardium
An echo from 3 months ago showed an EF of 40% with global mild
hypokinesis, without focal wall motion abnormalities.
Smith comment: the initial echo was so bad because even
myocardium that was salvaged was “stunned” and it takes time to
recover function. Weeks later, the EF improved from 15% to 40%. If
this patient had not had ventricular fibrillation and thus not had a
reasonably short door to balloon time, all of that stunned myocardium
would instead be permanently infarcted, with permanent 15% EF.
Troponin I quickly exceeded the laboratory limit of reporting at
25,000 ng/L.
4 days later:
Continued reperfusion.
He was discharged MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD (2/2/2025):
===================================
 5/13
We need to learn from cases like todayʼs.
Todayʼs initial ECG is not an easy tracing to interpret. This is
because (as per Dr. Meyers) — there is obvious LVH that
complicates assessment for potential acute ST-T wave
abnormalities.
To Emphasize: Once again — the history is KEY. This
patient is a man in his 60s who presented to the ED
with new CP. As a result — without yet looking at the
initial ECG, our “mindset” has-to-be awareness that this
history alone places this patient in ahigher risk
category for having an acute cardiac event.
As a result — Our “mindset” has-to-be that we need
to ruleout an acute event, rather than the other way
around. This means that if there is any uncertainty about
the diagnosis (or about the initial ECG) — that we need
to “dig further” until we arrive at more certainty in our
diagnosis. Unfortunately, this was not done in todayʼs
case. I say this — because compared to an ECG done
just 6 days earlier — there clearly has been significant
ST-T wave change, that in this patient who presents to
the ED with new CP — has-to-be recogized as an acute
OMI until proven otherwise(See Figure-1below — in
which I place these first 2 tracings in todayʼs case
together).
What Are the Oversights?
In my experience — many (if not most) clinicians
do not compare serial ECGs by placing both ECGs that they
are looking at side-by-side.
I fully acknowledge that I miss important findings when I
do not do this. I know this was not done in todayʼs case
— because if side-by-side comparison had been done
— then the difference in ST-T wave appearance
between leads V4,V5,V6 in ECG #1 and ECG #2 would
not have gone unnoticed.
We have often remarked on the challenge that LVH may
pose for recognizing acute ischemic changes. This is
because LV “strain” often manifests straightened and
elevated ST segments in anterior leads with deep S
waves from marked LVH. For example, as an isolated
finding — I would not necessarily interpret the ST
segment straightening and elevation that we see
in leads V2,V3 of ECG #1(outlined in RED and light
BLUE) as abnormal in a patient with marked LVH.
The other challenge posed by the ECG of a patient with
marked LVH with “strain” — is distinguishing between
the ST-T wave inversion in one or more lateral leads due
solely to LVH — vs that due to acute ischemia or
 6/13
infarction. This distinction is further complicated
because marked LVH may at times mask the ST-T wave
changes of acute ischemia. That said —
the asymmetric ST-T wave depression in lead
V6 of ECG #2 is classic for the ECG appearance of LV
“stain”. But 6 days later (ie, when ECG #1 was
recorded) — there is not even a hint of ST flattening or
depression in leads V4,V5,V6. This means that the ST-T
wave appearance in ECG #1 clearly represents
an acute change(compared to ECG #2) that
would not be missed if there had been lead-to-
lead comparison between these 2 tracings.
Figure-1: Comparison between today’s initial ECG — with
a prior ECG done just 6 days earlier.
How to Remember ECG Findings of LVH and LV “Strain”?
There are over 50 criteria in the literature for the ECG
diagnosis of LVH. And — the ST-T wave appearance of LV
“Strain” and “Strain Equivalents” is subjective, and can be
confusing.
To facilitate recall of these concepts — Weʼve
conveniently added a link in the menu at the top of every
page in Dr. Smithʼs ECG Blog that takes you to My
Comment in the June 20, 2020 post, in which I review
a user-friendly approach to ECG recognition of LVH and
“Strain” (See Figure-2).
 7/13
Figure-2: Handy link to LVH Criteria (conveniently placed in the
menu at the top of every page in Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog).
WHY then is Todayʼs Initial ECG So Difficult to Interpret?
The above said — I still found todayʼs ECG incredibly difficult
to interpret for the simple reason that there is marked
overlapof QRS complexes in virtually all of the chest leads.
Confession: I spent over half an hour staring at the QRS
complexes in each of the chest leads, trying to
distinguish between the limit of R waves from
overlapping S waves. I am still not certain that my color-
coding in Figure-1 is completely correct.
KEY Point: Whereas the ST segment straightening and
elevation that we see in leads V2 and V3 of ECG #1 does
not necessarily look abnormal (because as noted earlier
— LV “strain” from marked LVH may show this ST-T
wave appearance in anterior leads) — the same
is not true for leads V4,V5,V6.
Lead V4 in ECG #1 (outlined in dark BLUE) — manifests
an S wave that is only 13 mm deep. Doesnʼt the coved
and elevated ST segment in this lead look
disproportionate and abnormal?
As noted earlier — LV “Strain” manifests as ST-T wave
depression in lateral leads (or at least as ST-T wave
flattening). LV “strain” does not manifest as ST
segment coving and elevation, as we see in lead
V5 and especially in lead V6 of ECG #1.
What Could Have Been DonetoFacilitate Interpretation?
Rather than normal standardization — I would have
immediately repeated todayʼs initial ECG at half-
standard voltage. Doing so would have minimized
overlap — and facilitated appreciation of
disproportionality by clarifying relative size of QRS
complexes and ST-T waves.
Pendell Meyers onFebruary 2, 2025
CARDIAC ARREST LVH LVH AND OMI OMI
 8/13
OMI IN CARDIAC ARREST TERMINAL QRS DISTORTION
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
Another MUST know Syncope and a short
ECG, and why its pause on event
notoriety annoys Dr. monitor
Smith
