=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:37:29.494482",
  "file_size_bytes": 11456108,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Cases",
  "source_folder": "Cases",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Cases/What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED_ - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Dr. Smith's ECG Blog
Instructive ECGs in Emergency Medicine Clinical Content
Associate Editors:
— Pendell Meyers & Ken Grauer (2018)
— Jesse McLaren & Emre Aslanger (2022)
— Willy Frick (2024) — Sam Ghali (2025)
Home  What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the
ED?
Willy Frick onJanuary 9, 2026
What does this ECG
recorded 4 days prior (in
 
clinic) tell us about the ECGs
in the ED?
Submitted by Evan (Kuan-Yu) Lin, edits by Willy Frick
This ECG had been recorded in cardiology clinic:
Screenshot
What do you think?
Here is the case:
An 84-year-old male with hypertension, hyperlipidemia,

lichenoid reaction to losartan presented to the ED with chest
 1/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
pain that awoke pt from sleep at 2:30AM. Patient stated he
got up to use the bathroom and started feeling left-sided
substernal chest pain radiating to the left and right as well as
down towards the epigastric area with associated shortness
of breath. The pain was unrelenting, characterized as 8/10
pressure-like, prompting his wife to drive him to the ED.
Patient stated he has never had an episode like this before.
The pain lasted till when he arrived at the hospital at around
~5 am. In the ED, presenting vital signs initially hypertensive
160/80. Patient stated his chest pain began to improve as he
arrived to the ED and completely resolvedafter receiving
nitroglycerin, ASA 325 mg, clopidogrel 600 mg and heparin
gtt.
Patient is a never smoker. Per wife at bedside, patient takes
his medication religiously but was recently switched off of
losartan by outpatient dermatologist as they had determined
the ARB was the main culprit of lichenoid reaction.
Lichenoid reaction: the pathogenesis involves a cytotoxic T-
cell-mediated immune response targeting basal
keratinocytes, often triggered by drugs, infections, or contact
allergens.
For any patient who presents to the hospital with chest pain
and shortness of breath ACS, PE, aortic dissection and
pneumothorax are canʼt miss diagnoses.
Patientʼs CXR, CT PE and CT abdomen and pelvis had no
acute findings. There was a penetrating aortic atherosclerotic
ulcer at the level of the kidneys, bilateral aneurysmal common
iliac arteries likely secondary to chronic hypertension and
hyperlipidemia. First high sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT) at
0609 was 21 ng/L (normal). [URL is 14 ng/L for women and
22 ng/L for men)
Presenting EKG 1 with improving chest pain at 5:18am
What do you think?
 2/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Smith (similar to Willyʼs interpretation below): There is high
voltage and an intraventricular conduction delay (IVCD).
There is subtle ischemic ST depression in V3-V6, and it is
also concordant to a deep wide S-wave in V3, and to a less
deep, but still wide S-wave in V4-6. The ST depression in I
and aVL is Non-ischemic appearing, typical of the
repolarization abnormalities of LVH (or IVCD).
This ST depression in V3-6 is diagnostic of ischemia. Since
there are no signs of OMI, we would classify this as
subendocardial ischemia (SEI).
The Queen of Hearts is negative for OMI.
Smith: I ran it through our latest AI Model (unavailable to
others) and the Queen of Hearts diagnoses SEI (model value
= 0.599). If you compare to the ECG from clinic, there is clear
pseudonormalizationof T-waves in III and aVF.
Willy: In the context of high-risk chest pain, this is a concerning EKG.
There are features of LVH (R wave in aVL), so it could be tempting to
dismiss the lateral repolarization changes as strain. However, LVH
strain pattern is typically characterized by ST depression and T wave
inversion in inferolateral leads. This could explain I and aVL, but the
STD in the lateral precordium here is associated with abnormally
upright T-waves. Moreover, LVH “strain” pattern does not produce
STD in V3; it is typically limited to the lateral precordium (Smith: and
LVH STD is not concordant to the majority of the QRS).
Is all of this definitive for OMI? No, it could be subendocardial
ischemia. But given that the patientʼs chest pain was improving when
this EKG was obtained, we are left wondering what the EKG would have
shown 20 minutes prior to hospital arrival.
Regardless of the ECG, to the provider, this presentation
was extremely concerning. Any sleep-awakening chest pain
should be addressed with utmost vigilance, as pre-test
probability is very high. It is also essential to recognize that
acute coronary syndrome is a dynamic process—both
anatomically at the coronary level and electrically. As such, a
single EKG snapshot may appear deceptively ‘normal.ʼ As you
will see, this case highlights the nuanced beauty of EKG
interpretation, which often illuminates the evolution of acute
coronary syndromes, and exemplifies why I developed such a
deep passion for ECG and cardiology.
For reference, EKG 2 – baseline EKG just four days prior at
the cardiology office. Patient was seen at office for follow up
without any cardiovascular symptoms. There was no clear
documentation whether patient had been experiencing chest
pain; though interestingly, a nuclear stress test was ordered.
 3/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
EKG 2, obtained four days prior (the one at the top of the
post!)
Willy: In the context of the current presentation, this EKG is extremely
suspicious bordering on diagnostic for reperfused inferoposterior
occlusion MI. There is terminal T wave inversion in lead III with
reciprocal down-up T waves in I and aVL. Additionally, the T waves in
V1-2 are overly upright due to posterior reperfusion. This is likely an
unstable lesion with recurrent occlusion and spontaneous
reperfusion. And likely something in the patientʼs clinic presentation
led the cardiologist to order a stress test.
Case continues:
EKG 3 at 5:53am s/p nitroglycerin, DAPT, and heparin gtt
Evan: Arguably the most interesting EKG here. EKG 3 shows
interesting biphasic reperfusion changes, inferiorly AND
overly upright T wave in V2-V3. Admittedly, I did not know
about the reciprocal reperfusion changes for V2-3.
This is the EKG that I had sent to Willy. Willy had provided so
many pearls throughout my educational journey, and this is
another example where he pointed out the voluminous
looking T-wave in V2-3 are reciprocal reperfusion T-wave
changes for a posterior injury. Although the presenting EKG
was non-specific, the presenting history was concerning in
 4/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
itself. As stated above, OMI can often presently with
‘deceptively normal EKGʼ (EKG 1), as we are not sure the
chronicity of the ACS event. However, the dynamic
reperfusion changes of biphasic T-wave inferiorly and the
overly upright T-wave in V2-3 are diagnostic for a posterior
inferior pattern, suggestive of RCA culprit.
Queen of Hearts correctly identifies this as a reperfusion
pattern.
There is reperfusion of coronary artery via patientʼs
endogenous thrombolysis and the antiplatelet agents
preventing further aggregation of platelets. HsTnT as below
further reflected myocardial infarction:
0936: 77 ng/L
1445: 309 ng/L
1753: 532 ng/L
Following day 0111: 647 ng/L
LAO cranial view of RCA
0:00
Annotated still image showing critical lesion (with TIMI 3
flow) consistent with our ECG showing reperfusion
 5/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Post PCI of RCA
0:00
EKG 4 post-PCI
EKG 4: More reperfusion findings. The biphasic T wave now
progressed to deeply inverted T wave.
Outcome:
Patient underwent successful PCI to RCA for a critical lesion
with TIMI 3 flow, rest of the coronaries shows mild-moderate
disease. Although there is spontaneous reperfusion of the
culprit lesion, TTE showed inferior WMA with EF of 35-40%.
Patient was discharged with BB, ACEi, DAPT, and rosuvastatin
with plan for outpatient follow-up the next day.
Here is a great cheat sheet of reperfusion progression:
 6/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Learning points:
Pre-test probability can outweigh a “negative” test.
Smith: true, even if this was not really a negative ECG (it
showed SEI)
OMI can present with very unimpressive EKG, or rarely
even a normal EKG
Initially troponin can be normal in ACS
You must always obtain serial ECG along with serial
troponin
Recognize the dynamic nature of reperfusion findings
Biphasic T waves become increasingly negative
with reperfusion
Overly upright T waves in V2-3 are reciprocal to
posterior T wave inversion. Smith first described
these and proved what they represent: Posterior
reperfusion T-waves: Wellensʼ syndrome of the
posterior wall.
Here are a couple more examples of posterior
reperfusion T-waves: 2 Examples of Posterior
Reperfusion T-waves
= = =
======================================
MY Comment, by KEN GRAUER, MD (1/9/2026):
Confession: I fully acknowledge that I did not initially see all
of the ECG findings that I describe below in todayʼs initial
ECG. Itʼs good to be humbled periodically — as I believe this
serves as an excellent reminder to be ever diligent, not only
with the details found on each ECG — but also as a reminder
to retrospectively go back and review your interpretations
 7/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
after you learn what happened (and after you see how serial
ECGs evolved).
This is indeed a challenging and important case.
My principal oversight = not paying enough attention to
the history. at the time I assessed the initial ECG.
Regarding theHistory in todayʼs case:
The patient is an older man (84 years old) — who was
awakened from sleep by unrelenting CP (Chest Pain)
that he rated 8/10 in severity — and, which he never
had before.
The patientʼs wife drove him to the ED — with his CP
improving on arrival in the ED. His CP was totallygone
35 minutes later (ie, at the time the repeat ECGwas
recorded).
KEY Point: I did appreciate that new-onset CP in an older
man immediately places him in a higher-risk group for having
a new acute event. But in my haste — I failed to fully take into
account how spontaneous improvement in this patientʼs
symptoms before his arrival in the ED (and therefore before
the initial ECG was recorded) — how this needs to alter our
expectation as to what the initial ECG may show!
Significant improvement in CP severity often heralds the
onset of spontaneous reopening of the “culprit” vessel
(ie, the onset of spontaneous reperfusion).
As a result — ECG findings in the initial ECG may be
modest. And, if the timing of the initial ECG just happens
to correspond with the period inbetweenacute ST
elevation and T wave inversion from spontaneous
reperfusion — then the initial ECGmay look
surprisingly unremarkable ( = the period of “pseudo-
normalization”). Therefore — even minimal ST-T wave
abnormalities may be important!
= = =
Todayʼs Initial ECG:
For clarity and ease of comparison in Figure-1 — Iʼve put the
first 3 ECGs in todayʼs case together. Iʼve labeled ECG
findings of note in the initial ECG.
The mechanism of the rhythm (as seen in the long lead
V1 rhythm strip at the bottom of ECG #1) — is sinus.
That said — R-R intervals vary from one beat to the next,
with abrupt slowing before the last beat (this longer-
than-expected R-R interval is highlighted by the “X”at
 8/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
the end of the tracing). Iʼd interpret this as sinus
arrhythmia — with no indication of AV block or a
blocked PAC as the cause of sinus slowing. Instead — I
thought the beat-to-beat variation in R-R intervals with
surprising slowing at the end of the rhythm strip
suggests increased vagal tone(which may be relevant
in todayʼs case given the final diagnosis).
Regardingintervals (PR-QRS-QTc):
The PRinterval is prolonged (almost 1.5 large boxes in
duration — or just under 0.30 second in duration). Thus,
there is 1st-degree AV block (See my PR interval
measurement in lead II of ECG #1).
The QRS complex is wide ( = at least 0.13 secondin
duration — as per my QRS measurement in lead aVL of
ECG #1). This is relevant to todayʼs case — as ECG
assessment for acute ST-T wave changes is rendered
more difficult with intraventricular conduction defects.
The QTc looks normal.
QRS morphology is consistent with LAHB (Left Anterior
HemiBlock) — given the qR pattern in leads I,aVL and
the rS pattern with predominant negativity in all inferior
leads.
The very tall R wave in lead aVL ≥12 mm (as well as the
deep S waves in leads V1,V2) suggest LVH. That said,
even with both LAHB and LVH — we would not usually
expect QRS widening to the extent seen in ECG #1
(Usually LAHB and LVH increase QRS duration by no
more than 0.015 second). This suggests that some form
of IVCD is probably present, here with a leftward axis
(ie, with IVCD rendering interpretation of acute ST-T
wave changes to be more challenging).
RegardingST-T wave changes:
My “eye” was drawn to the ST segment flattening and
slight-but-real ST depression that is subtle but
unmistakeable in leads V4,V5,V6 (RED arrows in these
leads). In an older adult with new-onset severe CP —
there is no way that this finding in these lateral chest
leads is “normal”.
In the context of what we see in leads V4,V5,V6
— neighboring lead V3 is also abnormal (the BLUE
arrow in this lead highlighting loss of the normal slight
ST elevation that is usually seen in lead V3).
Although admittedly hard to define “proportionality” for
the T wave in neighboring lead V2 given QRS widening
and the deep S waves in leads V1,V2 — the T wave in
lead V2 still looks larger than I would expect.
 9/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
I was less sure about whether the depressed ST-T wave
in lead aVL was overly “bulky” (ergo my BLUE question
mark in this lead).
The BLUE arrow in lead aVR highlights ST elevation in
this lead. Given abnormal ST depression in 4 of the
chest leads — this may represent subendocardial
ischemia in a patient likely to have multivessel disease.
My Impression of ECG #1: I initially interpreted the above ECG
findings as suspicious but non-diagnostic. Given the history
of sudden and severe new-onset CP in this 84-year old man
— but with reduced CP by the time ECG #1 was recorded —
Iʼd amend my initial impression as much more concerning for
an acute event than I initially thought.
= = =
Figure-1: Comparison of the first 3 ECGs in todayʼs case.
= = =
2 Ways to Confirm the Diagnosis:
The “good news” in todayʼs case — is that there are 2 ways
to confirm the diagnosis of an ongoing acute OMI(and the
need for timely cardiac catheterization): — i) Find a prior
ECG on this patient that you can compare with todayʼs initial
ECG; — and/or — ii) Get a repeat ECG!(that giventhe
changing severity of CP since arriving in the ED — should
ideally be obtained within 15-20 minutes after ECG #1 was
recorded).
= = =
The ECG done 4 Days Earlier ( = ECG #2 ):
As per Dr. Frick — ECG #2 was obtained 4 days earlier in the
office, with the patient reportedly without any symptoms at
that time. That said — the fact that an ECG was done in the
office and that a nuclear stress test was ordered — makes me
suspect that this patient had not been truly “asymptomatic” at
 10/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
the time of this office visit 4 days before ECG #1 was
recorded.
Lead-by-lead comparison in Figure-1 between ECG #1
and ECG #2 reveals differences in multiple leads. The
rhythm in ECG #2 is sinus at ~60/minute, still with 1st-
degree AV block — but with complete regularity of the
rhythm, and without any pause (which I thought is
consistent with the probability that increased vagal tone
was operative in ECG #1).
As per Dr. Frick — high-lateral lead ST depression in
ECG #2 is not nearly as marked as it is in ECG #1.
T wave amplitude in the inferior leads is much less in
ECG #2 — with terminal T wave negativity in lead III
(which is matched by the mirror-image opposite picture
of terminal T wave positivity in lead aVL, as well as in
lead I). These look like T wave reperfusion changes.
There is no ST depression at all in leads V3-thru-V6 of
ECG #2 (as well asno significantST elevation in lead
aVR).
That said — the most “eye-catching” finding to me —
is the distinctly “fatter” T wave peaking in lead V2 in
ECG #2.
My Impression: I suspect this patient already had an
acute event 4 days earlier at the time ECG #2 was
recorded (now showing some T wave reperfusion
changes). But at the very least — there have been
diagnostic interval ST-T wave changes that are now
seen in todayʼs initial ECG compared to the ECG done 4
days earlier at this patientʼs office visit.
= = =
The Repeat ECG ( = ECG #3 ):
Itʼs remarkable how much has changed during the 35 minutes
that passed between the recording of todayʼs initial ECG —
and the repeat ECG:
The limb leads in ECG #3 clearly show reperfusion T
waves, consistent with inferior OMI(terminal T wave
inversion now seen in leads II,III,aVF — and marked
terminal T wave positivity in high-lateral leads I,aVL).
Anterior lead T waves in ECG #3 are disproportionately
larger than they were in ECG #1, consistent with
posterior wall reperfusion.
Reperfusion T wave inversion is now also seen in lateral
chest leads V5,V6 of ECG #3 — consistent with lateral
OMI.
 11/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
My Impression: The “dynamic“ ST-T wave changes
that have occurred during the 35 minute period between
the recording of ECG #1 and ECG #3, in association
with complete resolution of CP during this time period
— is diagnostic of infero-postero-lateral OMI, now with
reopening of the “culprit” RCA artery in this patient who
is now pain-free.
The fact that similar (albeit less marked) reperfusion T
wave changes were seen 4 days earlier (on ECG #2) —
but were no longer present on todayʼs initial ECG — yet
returned on todayʼs repeat ECG done 35 minutes after
ECG #1 — strongly suggests this patient had ongoing
infarction with a “stuttering”course in which the
“culprit” RCA has occluded and reopened a number of
times. Cardiac cath with definitive PCI is indicated to
stabilize and preserve reperfusion.
= = =
= = =
Willy Frick onJanuary 9, 2026
POSTERIOR REPERFUSION T-WAVES REPERFUSION
SHARE    
 PREVIOUS ARTICLE NEXT ARTICLE 
Narrow complex A Quiz on 10 ECGs
tachycardia; it recurs
after adenosine. What
should we do now?
SEARCH
 12/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
ABOUT
Dr. Smith
FACULTY PHYSICIAN
Dr. Stephen W. Smith is a faculty physician in the Emergency
Medicine Residency at Hennepin County Medical Center
(HCMC) in Minneapolis, MN, and Professor of Emergency
Medicine at the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Smith's Google Scholar Profile
Dr. Smith Articles on PubMed
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.
FOLLOW US ON X (TWITTER)
Follow @smithECGBlog Follow @PendellM Follow @ekgpress
Follow @AslangerE Follow @ecgcases Follow @PMcardioBot
Follow @EM_RESUS
FEATURED POSTS
 
‘NSTEM
‘NSTEMIʼ or reperfused OMI? An
OMI? And which lesion is the Jesse McLaren the culp
culprit?
onFebruary 8, 2025
BLOG ARCHIVE
Select Month
 13/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
LABELS
"inferior" ST depression(24) anterior STEMI equation(14)
anterior T wave inversion(15) atrial flutter(31) AV block(17)
aVL(31) aVR(30) Benign T-wave Inversion(23)
cardiac arrest(57)
cardiogenic shock(15) computer(21)
CT scan(13) de Winter's T-waves(25) Diffuse ST Depression(18)
Dr. K. Wang(20) early repolarization(22) echocardiogram(24)
false positive cath lab activation(49)
False positive ECG(24)
Formula for Early Repol vs. Anterior STEMI(39)
hyperacute T-waves(84)
hyperkalemia(65)
Hyperacute T-waves LAD(26)
hypokalemia(32) inferior hyperacute T-waves(24)
Inferior MI subtle(31)
inferoposterior STEMI(15)
LAD occlusion(112)
LAD occlusion vs. benign early repolarization
(43)
LBBB(55)
LAD OMI missed(19) LAD reperfusion(14)
lead misplacement(21) left bundle branch block(16) left main(24)
long QT(45) LV aneurysm(35) LVH(41)
LVH and OMI(14) missed OMI(33) missed STEMI(24)
modified sgarbossa criteria(38)
Morphine(14)
Myocarditis(21)
Normal ECG by computer algorithm(55)
OMI(149)
paced rhythm(24) Pediatric(16)
pericarditis(27)
PM Cardio Queen of Hearts(71)
posterior leads(22) posterior OMI(44)
posterior reperfusion T-waves(17) posterior STEMI(26)
Precordial swirl(38) prehospital ECG(20)
pseudoinfarction(23) pseudonormalization(24)
PseudoSTEMI(36) pulmonary embolism(30) PVC(15)
RBBB(50)
QOH(13) Queen knows false positive(14)
RBBB with LAFB (Left Anterior Fascicular Block)(20)
reperfusion(24) RVH(14) RV MI(21) serial ECG(35)
ST depression(40)
shark fin(14) spontaneous reperfusion(17)
subtle(41) Subtle LAD(50)
subendocardial ischemia(16)
Subtle LAD Occlusion(58)
Subtle STE(14)
Supraventricular Tachycardia (PSVT)(18) Syncope(34)
T-Wave inversion(26) takotsubo(24) terminal QRS distortion(17)
Thrombolytics(15) torsade(15) Transient OMI(14)
transient ST elevation(19) U-waves(24) ultrasound(19)
unstable angina(27) Ventricular Fibrillation(16)
ventricular tachycardia(30) Wellens' syndrome(31)
Wide complex tachycardia(46)
wide complex(16)
wide QRS(13) wide_complex_tachycardia(25)
 14/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
wolff parkinson white WPW(24) wraparound LAD(15) young(19)
Young Women(19)
Read Next
Magnus Nossen onJanuary 12, 2026
A Quiz on 10 ECGs
Created by Magnus Nossen This post consists of 10 ECGs and
different clinical scenarios. Your task is simple. Match the ECG to the
clinical…
Pendell Meyers onJanuary 15, 2026
A woman in her 60s with chest pain and “No STEMI”
Sent by anonymous. A woman in her 60s presented with acute chest
pain and normal vital signs. Here is her triage ECG: What do you
think? It…
 15/16

 What does this ECG recorded 4 days prior (in clinic) tell us about the ECGs in the ED? - Dr. Smith’s ECG Blog
Steve Smith onJanuary 19, 2026
Acute chest pain in a 50-something: resolves, recurs,
resolves: Does the ED ECG show “Early Repol”?
My city of Minneapolis is being attacked and occupied by ICE right
now and it is very frightening and anxiety provoking, especially for
anyone…
Never Miss a Beat – Join Our ECG
Insights Newsletter
Get the latest expert ECG cases, clinical pearls, and interpretation tips from Dr.
Smith delivered straight to your inbox—trusted by emergency physicians and
cardiologists worldwide.
Email Address Subscribe
Trusted insights, no spam—only ECG brilliance.
Expert ECG Interpretation and Emergency Cardiology
Education
© 2025 — Dr. Smith's ECG Blog. All Rights Reserved.
 16/16
