A 64-year-old woman with pancreatic cancer treated with chemotherapy presented with shortness of breath and cough over the past 5 months and was admitted due to a 2-week history of worsening dyspnoea and peripheral oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography found dilated right ventricle, interventricular septal flattening, and severe tricuspid regurgitation. Although contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism, pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy demonstrated multiple wedge-shaped defects in the peripheral regions of both lungs. Right heart catheterization confirmed pre-capillary PH, and pulmonary angiography revealed vascular narrowing of the peripheral pulmonary arteries. Based on the radiological findings and the relatively slow clinical course, CTEPH was initially suspected. However, pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology—performed by aspirating a blood sample via a Swan–Ganz catheter from the wedged position during right heart catheterization—revealed tumour cells, confirming the diagnosis of PTTM rather than CTEPH. Because of the poor prognosis, the patient received palliative care and died 2 months later.

chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) due to their similar characteristics. We report a case of PTTM secondary to pancreatic cancer that was initially suspected as CTEPH, but ultimately diagnosed by pulmonary wedge aspiration cytology using a Swan–Ganz catheter. A 64-year-old woman was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and lymph node metastases 4 months earlier and was treated with S-1 chemotherapy. She had also presented with dyspnoea and cough several months before being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple ground-glass opacities in the subpleural regions of both lungs. Although these were initially suspected as lung metastases, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) demonstrated only slight radiotracer accumulations, and bronchoalveolar lavage cytology revealed no malignancy. Due to oxygen desaturation, she started home oxygen therapy at 1 L/min. She was referred to our department with a 2-week history of progressive dyspnoea, cough, and peripheral oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography suggested right-sided heart failure caused by PH. She was treated with diuretics and continuous dobutamine infusion. Suspecting pulmonary thromboembolism, contrast-enhanced CT revealed no pulmonary thrombus, and leg ultrasound showed no deep vein thrombosis. However, pulmonary perfusion scintigraphy demonstrated multiple wedge-shaped defects in the peripheral regions of both lungs. After 15 days of heart failure
