=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "acoramidis-for-treating-transthyretin-amyloidosis-with-cardiomyopathy-pdf-2973530505971653.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:50:24.555319",
  "file_size_bytes": 73063,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/acoramidis-for-treating-transthyretin-amyloidosis-with-cardiomyopathy-pdf-2973530505971653.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Acoramidis for treating
transthyretin amyloidosis
with cardiomyopathy
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 14 January 2026
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta1121

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
1 Recommendations
1.1 Acoramidis can be used, within its marketing authorisation, as an option to treat
wild-type or hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy in adults.
Acoramidis can only be used if the company provides it according to the
commercial arrangement.
1.2 Use the least expensive option of the suitable treatments (including acoramidis
and tafamidis), having discussed the advantages and disadvantages of the
available treatments with the person with the condition. Take account of
administration costs, dosages, price per dose and commercial arrangements.
What this means in practice
Acoramidis must be funded in the NHS in England for the condition and population in
the recommendations, if it is considered the most suitable treatment option.
Acoramidis must be funded in England within 30 days of final publication of this
guidance.
There is enough evidence to show that acoramidis provides benefits and value for
money, so it can be used routinely across the NHS in this population.
NICE has produced tools and resources to support the implementation of this
guidance.
Why these recommendations were made
Usual treatment for transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy is tafamidis. Acoramidis
works in a similar way to tafamidis and would be offered to the same population.
Clinical trial evidence suggests that acoramidis is more effective than placebo. Acoramidis
has not been directly compared in a clinical trial with tafamidis, but an indirect comparison
suggests that they are likely to have similar clinical effectiveness. There are uncertainties

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
with the clinical-effectiveness evidence, including:
• how effective acoramidis is in people with severe heart failure, and
• that some people in the trial had both acoramidis and tafamidis.
But these uncertainties are unlikely to have affected the overall results.
A cost comparison suggests that the costs for acoramidis are similar to or lower than
those for tafamidis. So, acoramidis can be used.
For all evidence, see the committee papers. For more information on NICE's evaluation of
tafamidis, see the committee discussion section in NICE's technology appraisal guidance
on tafamidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy.

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
2 Information about acoramidis
Marketing authorisation indication
2.1 Acoramidis (Beyonttra, Bayer) is indicated for the 'treatment of wild-type or
variant transthyretin amyloidosis in adult patients with cardiomyopathy (ATTR-
CM)'.
Dosage in the marketing authorisation
2.2 The dosage schedule is available in the summary of product characteristics for
acoramidis.
Price
2.3 The list price of acoramidis is £8,547.60 for 120 x 356-mg tablets (excluding VAT;
company submission).
2.4 The company has a commercial arrangement. This makes acoramidis available to
the NHS with a discount. The size of the discount is commercial in confidence.
Sustainability
2.5 For information, the Carbon Reduction Plan for UK carbon emissions is published
on Bayer's webpage on sustainability.

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
3 Implementation
3.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 90 days of its date of publication.
Because acoramidis has been recommended through the cost-comparison
process, NHS England and integrated care boards have agreed to provide
funding to implement this guidance 30 days after publication.
3.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 60 days of the first
publication of the final draft guidance.
3.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy and the healthcare
professional responsible for their care thinks that acoramidis is the right
treatment, it should be available for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
4 Evaluation committee members and
NICE project team
Evaluation committee members
The highly specialised technologies committee is a standing advisory committee of NICE.
This topic was considered as a cost comparison by the chair, vice chair and a lead team of
the highly specialised technologies committee.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology being evaluated.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that evaluation.
Chair
Paul Arundel
Chair, highly specialised technologies evaluation committee
NICE project team
Each evaluation is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology analysts
(who act as technical leads for the evaluation), a technical adviser, a project manager and
an associate director.
Giacomo De Guisa
Technical lead
Lizzie Walker
Principal technical adviser
Thomas Feist
Project manager
Richard Diaz

Acoramidis for treating transthyretin amyloidosis with cardiomyopathy (TA1121)
Associate director
ISBN: 978-1-4731-8034-5
