Acute coronary syndromes
Overview
This guideline covers the early and longer-term (rehabilitation) management of acute
coronary syndromes. These include ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI),
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and unstable angina. The
guideline aims to improve survival and quality of life for people who have a heart attack or
unstable angina.
See the visual summaries on STEMI, unstable angina NSTEMI, and secondary prevention.
This guideline does not cover management of spontaneous coronary artery dissection.
The recommendations were developed before the COVID-19 pandemic. Acute coronary
syndromes are a possible sign of acute myocardial injury in patients with COVID-19. See
recommendations on acute myocardial injury in our guideline on managing COVID-19.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners and providers
• Adults with acute coronary syndromes, their families and carers

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 STEMI – early management
NICE has produced a visual summary of the recommendations on the early management
of STEMI.
Assessment
1.1.1 Immediately assess eligibility (irrespective of age, ethnicity or sex) for coronary
reperfusion therapy (either primary percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI] or
fibrinolysis) in people with acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI). [2013]
1.1.2 Do not use level of consciousness after cardiac arrest caused by suspected acute
STEMI to determine whether a person is eligible for coronary angiography (with
follow-on primary PCI if indicated). [2013]
1.1.3 Deliver coronary reperfusion therapy (either primary PCI or fibrinolysis) as quickly
as possible for eligible people with acute STEMI. [2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Initial drug therapy
1.1.4 Offer people with acute STEMI a single loading dose of 300 mg aspirin as soon as
possible unless there is clear evidence that they are allergic to it. [2010]
1.1.5 Do not offer routine glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors or fibrinolytic drugs before
arrival at the catheter laboratory to people with acute STEMI for whom primary
PCI is planned. [2013]
Coronary angiography with follow-on primary PCI
1.1.6 Offer coronary angiography, with follow-on primary PCI if indicated, as the
preferred coronary reperfusion strategy for people with acute STEMI, if:
• presentation is within 12 hours of onset of symptoms and
• primary PCI can be delivered within 120 minutes of the time when fibrinolysis
could have been given. [2013]
1.1.7 Offer coronary angiography, with follow-on primary PCI if indicated, to people
with acute STEMI and cardiogenic shock who present within 12 hours of the
onset of symptoms of STEMI. [2013]
1.1.8 Consider coronary angiography, with follow-on primary PCI if indicated, for
people with acute STEMI presenting more than 12 hours after the onset of
symptoms if there is evidence of continuing myocardial ischaemia. [2013]
1.1.9 Consider coronary angiography, with a view to coronary revascularisation if
indicated, for people with acute STEMI who present more than 12 hours after the
onset of symptoms and who have cardiogenic shock or go on to develop it.
[2013]
1.1.10 Consider radial (in preference to femoral) arterial access for people undergoing
coronary angiography (with follow-on primary PCI if indicated). [2013]
Dual antiplatelet therapy for people with acute STEMI having

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
primary PCI
1.1.11 For people with acute STEMI who are having primary PCI, offer:
• prasugrel, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, if they are not
already taking an oral anticoagulant (for people aged 75 and over, think about
whether the person's risk of bleeding with prasugrel outweighs its
effectiveness, in which case offer ticagrelor or clopidogrel as alternatives)
• clopidogrel, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, if they are
already taking an oral anticoagulant. [2020]
Prasugrel and ticagrelor are recommended as options in NICE technology
appraisal guidance for people with acute STEMI having primary PCI. For full
details, see the guidance on:
• prasugrel (TA317, 2014)
• ticagrelor (TA236, 2011).
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on dual antiplatelet
therapy for people with acute STEMI having primary PCI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
antiplatelet therapy.
Antithrombin therapy during primary PCI
1.1.12 Offer unfractionated heparin with bailout glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor in
combination with dual antiplatelet therapy to people with acute STEMI
undergoing primary PCI with radial access. [2020]
1.1.13 Consider bivalirudin with bailout glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor in combination with
dual antiplatelet therapy for people with acute STEMI undergoing primary PCI
when femoral access is needed.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
In November 2020, use of bivalirudin with prasugrel and aspirin was off label. See
NICE's information on prescribing medicines. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antithrombin
therapy during primary PCI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review D:
antithrombin therapy in adults with STEMI intended for primary PCI.
Thrombus extraction during primary PCI
1.1.14 Consider thrombus aspiration during primary PCI for people with acute STEMI.
[2013]
1.1.15 Do not routinely use mechanical thrombus extraction during primary PCI for
people with acute STEMI. [2013]
Complete or culprit vessel only revascularisation with PCI in
people with acute STEMI treated by primary PCI
1.1.16 Offer complete revascularisation with PCI for people with acute STEMI and
multivessel coronary artery disease without cardiogenic shock. Consider doing
this during the index hospital admission. [2020]
1.1.17 Consider culprit vessel only revascularisation with PCI rather than complete
revascularisation during the index procedure for people with acute STEMI and
multivessel coronary artery disease with cardiogenic shock. [2020]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on complete
revascularisation with PCI or culprit vessel only PCI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review E:
culprit versus complete revascularisation.
Drug-eluting stents in primary PCI
1.1.18 If stenting is indicated, offer a drug-eluting stent to people with acute STEMI
undergoing revascularisation by primary PCI. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on drug-eluting
stents in primary PCI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:
drug-eluting stents.
Fibrinolysis
1.1.19 Offer fibrinolysis to people with acute STEMI presenting within 12 hours of onset
of symptoms if primary PCI cannot be delivered within 120 minutes of the time
when fibrinolysis could have been given. [2013]
For recommendations in NICE technology appraisal guidance on choosing
thrombolytic treatments for acute STEMI, see guidance on the use of drugs for
early thrombolysis (TA52, 2002).
1.1.20 When treating people with fibrinolysis, give an antithrombin at the same time.
[2013]
1.1.21 Offer an electrocardiogram (ECG) to people with acute STEMI treated with
fibrinolysis, 60 to 90 minutes after administration. For those who have residual

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
ST-segment elevation suggesting failed coronary reperfusion:
• offer immediate coronary angiography, with follow-on PCI if indicated
• do not repeat fibrinolytic therapy. [2013]
1.1.22 If a person with acute STEMI has recurrent myocardial ischaemia after
fibrinolysis, seek immediate specialist cardiological advice and, if appropriate,
offer coronary angiography, with follow-on PCI if indicated. [2013]
1.1.23 Consider coronary angiography during the same hospital admission for people
with acute STEMI who are clinically stable after successful fibrinolysis. [2013]
Management for people with STEMI not treated with PCI
1.1.24 Offer ticagrelor, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, to people with
acute STEMI not treated with PCI, unless they have a high bleeding risk. [2020]
1.1.25 Consider clopidogrel, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, or aspirin
alone, for people with acute STEMI not treated with PCI, if they have a high
bleeding risk. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on dual
antiplatelet therapy for people with STEMI not treated with PCI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
antiplatelet therapy.
1.1.26 Offer medical management to people with acute STEMI who are ineligible for any
reperfusion therapy. [2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Tests before discharge
1.1.27 Assess left ventricular function in all people who have had a STEMI. [2013]
1.2 NSTEMI and unstable angina – early
management
NICE has produced a visual summary of the recommendations on the early management
of NSTEMI and unstable angina.
Initial drug therapy
1.2.1 Offer aspirin as soon as possible to all people with unstable angina or
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and continue
indefinitely unless contraindicated by bleeding risk or aspirin hypersensitivity.
[2010]
1.2.2 Offer people with unstable angina or NSTEMI a single loading dose of 300-mg
aspirin as soon as possible unless there is clear evidence that they are allergic to
it. [2010]
1.2.3 Offer fondaparinux to people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who do not have a
high bleeding risk, unless they are undergoing immediate coronary angiography.
[2020]
See the recommendation on unfractionated heparin in the section on coronary
angiography with follow-on PCI for advice about people with unstable angina or NSTEMI
who are undergoing immediate coronary angiography.
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on initial
antithrombin therapy for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:
antithrombin for unstable angina and NSTEMI.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.2.4 Consider unfractionated heparin, with dose adjustment guided by monitoring of
clotting function, as an alternative to fondaparinux for people with unstable
angina or NSTEMI and significant renal impairment (creatinine above
265 micromoles per litre). [2010]
1.2.5 Carefully consider the choice and dose of antithrombin for people with unstable
angina or NSTEMI who have a high risk of bleeding associated with any of the
following:
• advancing age
• known bleeding complications
• renal impairment
• low body weight. [2010]
1.2.6 Do not offer dual antiplatelet therapy to people with chest pain before a diagnosis
of unstable angina or NSTEMI is made. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on dual antiplatelet
therapy for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
antiplatelet therapy.
Risk assessment
1.2.7 As soon as the diagnosis of unstable angina or NSTEMI is made, and aspirin and
antithrombin therapy have been offered, formally assess individual risk of future
adverse cardiovascular events using an established risk scoring system that
predicts 6-month mortality (for example, Global Registry of Acute Cardiac Events
[GRACE]). [2010]
1.2.8 Include in the formal risk assessment:

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
• a full clinical history (including age, previous myocardial infarction [MI] and
previous PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting [CABG])
• a physical examination (including measurement of blood pressure and heart
rate)
• a resting 12-lead ECG, looking particularly for dynamic or unstable patterns
that indicate myocardial ischaemia
• blood tests (such as troponin I or T, creatinine, glucose and haemoglobin).
[2010]
1.2.9 Record the results of the risk assessment in the person's care record. [2010]
1.2.10 Use risk assessment to guide clinical management, and balance the benefit of a
treatment against any risk of related adverse events in the light of this
assessment. [2010]
1.2.11 Use predicted 6-month mortality to categorise the risk of future adverse
cardiovascular events as shown in table 1. [2010]
Table 1 Categorising risk of future adverse
cardiovascular events
Predicted 6-month mortality Risk of future adverse cardiovascular events
1.5% or below Lowest
>1.5% to 3.0% Low
>3.0% to 6.0% Intermediate
>6.0% to 9.0% High
over 9.0% Highest
Categories of risk are derived from the Myocardial Ischaemia National Audit Project
(MINAP) database.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Coronary angiography with follow-on PCI
1.2.12 Offer immediate coronary angiography to people with unstable angina or NSTEMI
if their clinical condition is unstable. [2020]
1.2.13 Consider coronary angiography (with follow-on PCI if indicated) within 72 hours
of first admission for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who have an
intermediate or higher risk of adverse cardiovascular events (predicted 6-month
mortality above 3.0%) and no contraindications to angiography (such as active
bleeding or comorbidity).
See table 2 for information on the benefits and risks of early invasive treatment
compared with conservative management. [2020]
1.2.14 Consider coronary angiography (with follow-on PCI if indicated) for people with
unstable angina or NSTEMI who are initially assessed to be at low risk of adverse
cardiovascular events (predicted 6-month mortality 3.0% or less) if ischaemia is
subsequently experienced or is demonstrated by ischaemia testing.
See table 2 for information on the benefits and risks of early invasive treatment
compared with conservative management. [2020]
1.2.15 Be aware that some younger people with low risk scores for mortality at 6 months
may still be at high risk of adverse cardiovascular events and may benefit from
early angiography. [2020]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Table 2 Benefits and risks of early invasive treatment (coronary angiography with PCI if
needed) compared with conservative management for people with unstable angina or
NSTEMI
Conservative management with
Benefits/risks/other Coronary angiography and possible percutaneous
later coronary angiography if
factors coronary intervention (PCI) within 72 hours
problems continue or develop
Avoid the immediate
risks of invasive
treatment, including:
Reduced deaths from all causes at 6 to
• death within
12 months and at 2 years. Reduced deaths
4 months related to
from heart problems at 1 and 2 years.
the procedure from
Reduced incidence of myocardial infarction causes other than MI
(MI) at 30 days, 6 to 12 months and
• procedure-related MI
2 years.
Reduced incidence of stroke at 1 year, • major bleeding in
Benefits
particularly in people at high risk of future hospital and up to
(advantages)
adverse events. 2 years after the
Reduced readmission to hospital and procedure.
difficult-to-treat angina in the medium
These are particularly
term, particularly in people at high risk of
relevant for people at
future adverse events.
low risk of future
Psychological benefits – people are not
adverse events.
anxious about delaying angiography.
Psychological benefits –
people are not anxious
about having an invasive
procedure.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Conservative management with
Benefits/risks/other Coronary angiography and possible percutaneous
later coronary angiography if
factors coronary intervention (PCI) within 72 hours
problems continue or develop
Increased risk of MI after
Increased risk of death during the first 6 months.
4 months, particularly for people at low risk
Increased risk of stroke
of future adverse events.
at 1 year, particularly in
Risks Risk of procedure-related MI. the people at high risk of
(disadvantages) Increased risk of major bleeding during the future adverse events.
index admission, at 30 days and 2 years. Psychological factors –
Emergency treatment leaves little time for people may be anxious
shared decision making. about delaying
angiography.
Recent advances in PCI might increase
early benefit, particularly reducing
bleeding.
Other factors Coronary angiography within 72 hours –
ensures speedy intervention while allowing
time for the correct diagnosis, identifying
other conditions and treating symptoms.
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on early invasive
versus conservative management for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
early invasive versus conservative management for unstable angina and NSTEMI.
1.2.16 Offer systemic unfractionated heparin in the cardiac catheter laboratory to
people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who are undergoing PCI whether or not
they have already received fondaparinux.
In November 2020, this was an off-label use of unfractionated heparin. See
NICE's information on prescribing medicines. [2020]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antithrombin
therapy for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review C:
antithrombin for unstable angina and NSTEMI.
1.2.17 For people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who are having coronary
angiography, offer:
• prasugrel or ticagrelor, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, if they
have no separate indication for ongoing oral anticoagulation (if using
prasugrel, only give it once coronary anatomy has been defined and PCI is
intended; for people aged 75 and over, think about whether the person's risk
of bleeding with prasugrel outweighs its effectiveness)
• clopidogrel, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, if they have a
separate indication for ongoing oral anticoagulation. [2020]
Prasugrel and ticagrelor are recommended as options in NICE technology
appraisal guidance for some people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who are
having coronary angiography. For full details, see the guidance on:
• prasugrel (TA317, 2014)
• ticagrelor (TA236, 2011).
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on dual antiplatelet
therapy for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
antiplatelet therapy.
1.2.18 If stenting is indicated, offer a drug-eluting stent to people with unstable angina
or NSTEMI undergoing revascularisation by PCI. [2020]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on drug-eluting
stents.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review F:
drug-eluting stents.
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors for complex PCI
1.2.19 Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors as an adjunct to PCI are recommended as an option
in NICE technology appraisal guidance for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI
who are having complex procedures. For full details, see the guidance on
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (TA47, 2010).
Management when PCI is not indicated
1.2.20 Consider conservative management without early coronary angiography for
people with unstable angina or NSTEMI who have a low risk of adverse
cardiovascular events (predicted 6-month mortality 3.0% or less). [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendation and
how it might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on early invasive
versus conservative management for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review B:
early invasive versus conservative management for unstable angina and NSTEMI.
1.2.21 Offer ticagrelor, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, to people with
unstable angina or NSTEMI when PCI is not indicated, unless they have a high
bleeding risk. [2020]
Ticagrelor is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal guidance
for treating unstable angina or NSTEMI when PCI is not indicated. For full details,
see the guidance on ticagrelor (TA236, 2011).

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.2.22 Consider clopidogrel, as part of dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, or aspirin
alone, for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI when PCI is not indicated, if
they have a high bleeding risk. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antiplatelet
therapy for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
antiplatelet therapy.
Advice on management strategies
1.2.23 Offer people with unstable angina or NSTEMI clear information about the risks
and benefits of the treatments offered so that they can make informed choices
about management strategies. Information should be appropriate to the person's
underlying risk of a future adverse cardiovascular event and any comorbidities.
[2010]
1.2.24 When advising people with unstable angina or NSTEMI about the choice of
revascularisation strategy (PCI or CABG), take account of coronary angiographic
findings, comorbidities, and the benefits and risks of each intervention. [2010]
1.2.25 When the role of revascularisation or the revascularisation strategy is unclear,
resolve this by discussion involving an interventional cardiologist, cardiac surgeon
and other healthcare professionals relevant to the needs of the person. Discuss
the choice of revascularisation strategy with the person. [2010]
Tests before discharge
1.2.26 To detect and quantify inducible ischaemia, consider ischaemia testing before
discharge for people whose condition has been managed conservatively and who
have not had coronary angiography. [2010]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.2.27 Assess left ventricular function in all people who have had an NSTEMI. [2013]
1.2.28 Consider assessing left ventricular function in all people with unstable angina.
[2010]
1.2.29 Record measures of left ventricular function in the person's care record and in
correspondence with the primary healthcare team and the person. [2010]
1.3 Hyperglycaemia in acute coronary syndromes
Managing hyperglycaemia in inpatients within 48 hours of acute
coronary syndrome
1.3.1 Manage hyperglycaemia in people admitted to hospital for an acute coronary
syndrome by keeping blood glucose levels below 11.0 mmol/litre while avoiding
hypoglycaemia. In the first instance, consider a dose-adjusted insulin infusion
with regular monitoring of blood glucose levels. [2011]
1.3.2 Do not routinely offer intensive insulin therapy (an intravenous infusion of insulin
and glucose with or without potassium) to manage hyperglycaemia (blood
glucose above 11.0 mmol/litre) in people admitted to hospital for an acute
coronary syndrome unless clinically indicated. [2011]
Identifying people with hyperglycaemia after acute coronary
syndrome who are at high risk of developing diabetes
1.3.3 Offer all people with hyperglycaemia after acute coronary syndrome and without
known diabetes tests for:
• HbA1c levels before discharge
• fasting blood glucose levels no earlier than 4 days after the onset of acute
coronary syndrome.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
These tests should not delay discharge. [2011]
1.3.4 Do not routinely offer oral glucose tolerance tests to people with hyperglycaemia
after acute coronary syndrome and without known diabetes if HbA1c and fasting
blood glucose levels are within the normal range. [2011]
Advice and ongoing monitoring for people with hyperglycaemia
after acute coronary syndrome and without known diabetes
1.3.5 Offer people with hyperglycaemia after acute coronary syndrome and without
known diabetes lifestyle advice on the following:
• healthy eating
• physical exercise
• weight management
• smoking cessation
• alcohol consumption.
See the section on lifestyle changes after an MI for more information. [2011]
1.3.6 Advise people without known diabetes that if they have had hyperglycaemia after
an acute coronary syndrome, they:
• are at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes
• should consult their GP if they experience the following symptoms:
－ frequent urination
－ excessive thirst
－ weight loss
－ fatigue

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
• should be offered tests for diabetes at least annually. [2011]
1.3.7 Inform GPs that they should offer at least annual monitoring of HbA1c or fasting
blood glucose levels to people without known diabetes who have had
hyperglycaemia after an acute coronary syndrome. [2011]
1.4 Drug therapy for secondary prevention
NICE has produced a visual summary of the recommendations on cardiac rehabilitation
and secondary prevention.
1.4.1 For secondary prevention, offer people who have had MI treatment with the
following drugs:
• angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
• dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin plus a second antiplatelet) unless they have
a separate indication for anticoagulation (see the section on antiplatelet
therapy for people with an ongoing separate indication for anticoagulation)
• beta-blocker
• statin. [2007, amended 2020]
1.4.2 Ensure that a clear management plan is available to the person who has had an
MI and is also sent to the GP, including:
• details and timing of any further drug titration
• monitoring of blood pressure
• monitoring of renal function. [2013]
1.4.3 Offer all people who have had an MI an assessment of bleeding risk at their
follow-up appointment. [2013]
1.4.4 Rivaroxaban, with aspirin and clopidogrel, or aspirin alone, is recommended as an
option in NICE technology appraisal guidance for preventing atherothrombotic

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
events in people who have had an acute coronary syndrome with elevated
cardiac biomarkers, taking bleeding risk into account. For full details, see the
guidance on rivaroxaban (TA335, 2015).
1.4.5 Rivaroxaban plus aspirin is recommended as an option in NICE technology
appraisal guidance for preventing atherothrombotic events in some people with
coronary artery disease who are at high risk of ischaemic events, taking bleeding
risk into account. For full details, see the guidance on rivaroxaban (TA607, 2019).
ACE inhibitors
1.4.6 Offer people who present acutely with an MI, an ACE inhibitor as soon as they are
haemodynamically stable. Continue the ACE inhibitor indefinitely. [2013]
1.4.7 Titrate the ACE inhibitor dose upwards at short intervals (for example, every
12 to 24 hours) before the person leaves hospital until the maximum tolerated or
target dose is reached. If it is not possible to complete the titration during this
time, it should be completed within 4 to 6 weeks of hospital discharge. [2013]
1.4.8 Do not offer combined treatment with an ACE inhibitor and an angiotensin II
receptor blocker (ARB) to people after an MI, unless there are other reasons to
use this combination. [2013]
1.4.9 After an MI, offer people who are intolerant to ACE inhibitors, an ARB instead of
an ACE inhibitor. [2013]
1.4.10 Renal function, serum electrolytes and blood pressure should be measured
before starting an ACE inhibitor or ARB and again within 1 or 2 weeks of starting
treatment. People should have appropriate monitoring as the dose is titrated
upwards, until the maximum tolerated or target dose is reached, and then at least
annually. More frequent monitoring may be needed in people who are at
increased risk of deterioration in renal function. People with chronic heart failure
should be monitored in line with the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure in
adults. [2007]
1.4.11 Offer an ACE inhibitor to people who have had an MI more than 12 months ago.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Titrate to the maximum tolerated or target dose (over a 4- to 6-week period) and
continue indefinitely. [2013]
1.4.12 Offer people who have had an MI more than 12 months ago and who are
intolerant to ACE inhibitors an ARB instead of an ACE inhibitor. [2013]
Antiplatelet therapy
1.4.13 Offer aspirin to all people after an MI and continue it indefinitely, unless they are
aspirin intolerant or have an indication for anticoagulation (see the section on
antiplatelet therapy for people with an ongoing separate indication for
anticoagulation). [2007, amended 2013]
1.4.14 Offer aspirin to people who have had an MI more than 12 months ago and
continue it indefinitely. [2013]
1.4.15 Continue dual antiplatelet therapy for up to 12 months after an MI unless
contraindicated (see recommendations 1.1.11, 1.1.24, 1.1.25, 1.2.17, 1.2.21 and 1.2.22
for more information about dual antiplatelet therapy). [2020]
1.4.16 Ticagrelor with aspirin for up to 3 years is recommended as an option in NICE
technology appraisal guidance for preventing atherothrombotic events in people
who had an MI more than 12 months ago and are at high risk of a further event.
For full details, see the guidance on ticagrelor (TA420, 2016).
1.4.17 For people with aspirin hypersensitivity who have had an MI, clopidogrel
monotherapy should be considered as an alternative treatment. [2007]
1.4.18 People with a history of dyspepsia should be considered for treatment in line with
the NICE guideline on gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults.
[2007, amended 2013]
1.4.19 After appropriate treatment, people with a history of aspirin-induced ulcer
bleeding whose ulcers have healed and who are negative for Helicobacter pylori
should be considered for treatment in line with the NICE guideline on gastro-
oesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia in adults. [2007, amended 2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.4.20 Offer clopidogrel instead of aspirin to people who also have other clinical vascular
disease, and who have:
• had an MI and stopped dual antiplatelet therapy or
• had an MI more than 12 months ago. [2013]
Clopidogrel is recommended as an option in NICE technology appraisal
guidance to prevent occlusive vascular events in some people. For full
details, see the guidance on clopidogrel (TA210, 2010).
Antiplatelet therapy for people with an ongoing separate indication for
anticoagulation
1.4.21 For people who have a separate indication for anticoagulation, take into account
all of the following when thinking about the duration and type (dual or single) of
antiplatelet therapy in the 12 months after an acute coronary syndrome:
• bleeding risk
• thromboembolic risk
• cardiovascular risk
• person's wishes.
Be aware that the optimal duration of aspirin therapy has not been
established, and that long-term continuation of aspirin, clopidogrel and oral
anticoagulation (triple therapy) significantly increases bleeding risk. [2020]
1.4.22 For people already on anticoagulation who have had PCI, continue
anticoagulation and clopidogrel for up to 12 months. If the person is taking a
direct oral anticoagulant, adjust the dose according to bleeding risk,
thromboembolic risk and cardiovascular risk. [2020]
1.4.23 For people with a new indication for anticoagulation who have had PCI, offer
clopidogrel (to replace prasugrel or ticagrelor) for up to 12 months and an oral
anticoagulant licensed for the indication, which best matches the person's:

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
• bleeding risk
• thromboembolic risk
• cardiovascular risk
• wishes. [2020]
1.4.24 For people already on anticoagulation, or those with a new indication, who have
not had PCI (medical management, CABG), continue anticoagulation and, unless
there is a high risk of bleeding, consider continuing aspirin (or clopidogrel for
people with contraindication for aspirin) for up to 12 months. [2020]
1.4.25 Do not routinely offer prasugrel or ticagrelor in combination with an anticoagulant
that is needed for an ongoing separate indication for anticoagulation. [2020]
1.4.26 For people with an ongoing indication for anticoagulation 12 months after an MI,
take into consideration all of the following when thinking about the need for
continuing antiplatelet therapy:
• indication for anticoagulation
• bleeding risk
• thromboembolic risk
• cardiovascular risk
• person's wishes. [2013]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on antiplatelet
therapy for people with an indication for anticoagulation.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review G:
combination therapy.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Beta-blockers
1.4.27 Offer people a beta-blocker as soon as possible after an MI, when the person is
haemodynamically stable. [2013]
1.4.28 Communicate plans for titrating beta-blockers up to the maximum tolerated or
target dose – for example, in the discharge summary. [2013]
1.4.29 Consider continuing a beta-blocker for 12 months after an MI for people without
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. [2020]
1.4.30 Discuss the potential benefits and risks of stopping or continuing beta-blockers
beyond 12 months after an MI for people without reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction. Include in the discussion:
• the lack of evidence on the relative benefits and harms of continuing beyond
12 months
• the person's experience of adverse effects. [2020]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2020 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on duration of
beta-blocker treatment after an MI.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review H:
beta-blockers.
1.4.31 Continue a beta-blocker indefinitely in people with reduced left ventricular
ejection fraction. [2013]
1.4.32 Offer all people who have had an MI more than 12 months ago, who have reduced
left ventricular ejection fraction, a beta-blocker whether or not they have
symptoms. For people with heart failure plus reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction, manage the condition in line with the NICE guideline on chronic heart
failure in adults. [2013]
1.4.33 Do not offer people without reduced left ventricular ejection fraction or heart

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
failure, who have had an MI more than 12 months ago, treatment with a beta-
blocker unless there is an additional clinical indication for a beta-blocker. [2013]
Calcium channel blockers
1.4.34 Do not routinely offer calcium channel blockers to reduce cardiovascular risk after
an MI. [2007]
1.4.35 If beta-blockers are contraindicated or need to be discontinued, diltiazem or
verapamil may be considered for secondary prevention in people without
pulmonary congestion or reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. [2007]
1.4.36 For people whose condition is stable after an MI, calcium channel blockers may
be used to treat hypertension and/or angina. For people with heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction, use amlodipine, and avoid verapamil, diltiazem and
short-acting dihydropyridine agents in line with the NICE guideline on chronic
heart failure in adults. [2007, amended 2020]
Potassium channel activators
1.4.37 Do not offer nicorandil to reduce cardiovascular risk after an MI. [2007]
Aldosterone antagonists in people with heart failure and reduced
left ventricular ejection fraction
1.4.38 For people who have had an acute MI and who have symptoms and/or signs of
heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, initiate treatment with
an aldosterone antagonist licensed for post-MI treatment within 3 to 14 days of
the MI, preferably after ACE inhibitor therapy. [2007]
1.4.39 People who have recently had an acute MI and have clinical heart failure and
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, but who are already being treated with
an aldosterone antagonist for a concomitant condition (for example, chronic heart
failure), should continue with the aldosterone antagonist or an alternative,

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
licensed for early post-MI treatment. [2007]
1.4.40 For people who have had a proven MI in the past and heart failure due to reduced
left ventricular ejection fraction, treatment with an aldosterone antagonist should
be in line with the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure in adults. [2007]
1.4.41 Monitor renal function and serum potassium before and during treatment with an
aldosterone antagonist. If hyperkalaemia is a problem, halve the dose of the
aldosterone antagonist or stop the drug. [2007]
Statins and other lipid-lowering agents
1.4.42 Statin therapy is recommended for adults with clinical evidence of cardiovascular
disease in line with recommendations on lipid-lowering treatment for secondary
prevention in the NICE guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and
reduction. [2007]
1.5 Coronary revascularisation after an MI
1.5.1 Offer a cardiological assessment to everyone who has had a previous MI, but not
had coronary revascularisation to consider whether coronary revascularisation is
appropriate. This should take into account comorbidity. [2007, amended 2020]
1.6 Selected patient subgroups
People with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction
1.6.1 Implantable cardioverter defibrillators, cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT)
with defibrillator or CRT with pacing are recommended as options in NICE
technology appraisal guidance for treating people with heart failure with left
ventricular dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% or less. For
full details, see the guidance on implantable cardioverter defibrillators and
cardiac resynchronisation therapy (TA314, 2014). [2007]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
People with hypertension
1.6.2 Treat hypertension in line with the NICE guideline on hypertension in adults.
[2007, amended 2013]
1.7 Communication of diagnosis and advice
1.7.1 After an acute MI, ensure that the following are part of every discharge summary:
• confirmation of the diagnosis of acute MI
• results of investigations
• incomplete drug titrations
• future management plans
• advice on secondary prevention. [2007, amended 2013]
1.7.2 Offer a copy of the discharge summary to the person. [2007]
1.8 Cardiac rehabilitation after an MI
1.8.1 All people (regardless of their age) should be given advice about and offered a
cardiac rehabilitation programme with an exercise component. [2007]
1.8.2 Cardiac rehabilitation programmes should provide a range of options, and people
should be encouraged to attend all those appropriate to their clinical needs.
People should not be excluded from the entire programme if they choose not to
attend certain components. [2007]
1.8.3 If a person has cardiac or other clinical conditions that may worsen during
exercise, these should be treated if possible before they are offered the exercise
component of cardiac rehabilitation. For some people, the exercise component
may be adapted by an appropriately qualified healthcare professional. [2007]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.8.4 People with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction who are stable can safely be
offered the exercise component of cardiac rehabilitation. [2007]
Encouraging people to attend
1.8.5 Deliver cardiac rehabilitation in a non-judgemental, respectful and culturally
sensitive manner. Consider employing bilingual peer educators or cardiac
rehabilitation assistants who reflect the diversity of the local population. [2013]
1.8.6 Establish people's health beliefs and their specific illness perceptions before
offering appropriate lifestyle advice and to encourage attendance to a cardiac
rehabilitation programme. [2013]
1.8.7 Offer cardiac rehabilitation programmes designed to motivate people to attend
and complete the programme. Explain the benefits of attending. [2013]
1.8.8 Discuss with the person any factors that might stop them attending a cardiac
rehabilitation programme, such as transport difficulties. [2013]
1.8.9 Offer cardiac rehabilitation programmes in a choice of venues (including at the
person's home, in hospital and in the community) and at a choice of times of day,
for example, sessions outside of working hours. Explain the options available.
[2013]
1.8.10 Provide a range of different types of exercise, as part of the cardiac rehabilitation
programme, to meet the needs of people of all ages, or those with significant
comorbidity. Do not exclude people from the whole programme if they choose not
to attend specific components. [2013]
1.8.11 Offer single-sex cardiac rehabilitation programme classes if there is sufficient
demand. [2013]
1.8.12 Enrol people who have had an MI in a system of structured care, ensuring that
there are clear lines of responsibility for arranging the early initiation of cardiac
rehabilitation. [2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.8.13 Begin cardiac rehabilitation as soon as possible after admission before discharge
from hospital, and invite the person to a cardiac rehabilitation session. This
should start within 10 days of their discharge from hospital. [2013]
1.8.14 Contact people who do not start or do not continue to attend the cardiac
rehabilitation programme with a further reminder, such as:
• a motivational letter
• a prearranged visit from a member of the cardiac rehabilitation team
• a telephone call
• a combination of the above. [2013]
1.8.15 Seek feedback from cardiac rehabilitation programme users and aim to use this
feedback to increase the number of people starting and attending the
programme. [2013]
1.8.16 Be aware of the wider health and social care needs of a person who has had an
MI. Offer information and sources of help on:
• economic issues
• welfare rights
• housing and social support issues. [2013]
1.8.17 Make cardiac rehabilitation equally accessible and relevant to all people after an
MI, particularly people from groups that are less likely to access this service.
These include people from black, Asian and minority ethnic groups, older people,
people from lower socioeconomic groups, women, people from rural
communities, people with a learning disability and people with mental and
physical health conditions. [2007, amended 2013]
1.8.18 Encourage all staff, including senior medical staff, involved in providing care for
people after an MI, to actively promote cardiac rehabilitation. [2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Health education and information needs
1.8.19 Comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation programmes should include health
education and stress management components. [2007]
1.8.20 A home-based programme validated for people who have had an MI (such as
NHS Lothian's heart manual) that incorporates education, exercise and stress
management components with follow ups by a trained facilitator may be used to
provide comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation. [2007]
1.8.21 Take into account the physical and psychological status of the patient, the nature
of their work and their work environment when giving advice on returning to
work. [2007]
1.8.22 Be up to date with the latest Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA)
guidelines. Regular updates are published by the DVLA. [2007]
1.8.23 After an MI without complications, people who wish to travel by air should seek
advice from the Civil Aviation Authority. People who have had a complicated MI
need expert individual advice. [2007, amended 2013]
1.8.24 People who have had an MI who hold a pilot's licence should seek advice from
the Civil Aviation Authority. [2007]
1.8.25 Take into account the person's physical and psychological status, as well as the
type of activity planned when offering advice about the timing of returning to
normal activities. [2007]
1.8.26 An estimate of the physical demand of a particular activity, and a comparison
between activities, can be made using tables of metabolic equivalents (METS) of
different activities (for further information, please refer to the information from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Advise people how to use a
perceived exertion scale to help monitor physiological demand. People who have
had a complicated MI may need expert advice. [2007]
1.8.27 Advice on competitive sport may need expert assessment of function and risk,
and is dependent on what sport is being discussed and the level of

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
competitiveness. [2007]
Psychological and social support
1.8.28 Offer stress management in the context of comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation.
[2007]
1.8.29 Do not routinely offer complex psychological interventions such as cognitive
behavioural therapy. [2007]
1.8.30 Involve partners or carers in the cardiac rehabilitation programme if the person
wishes. [2007]
1.8.31 For recommendations on managing clinical anxiety or depression, refer to the
NICE guidelines on anxiety, depression in adults and depression in adults with a
chronic physical health problem. [2007]
Sexual activity
1.8.32 Reassure people that after recovery from an MI, sexual activity presents no
greater risk of triggering a subsequent MI than if they had never had an MI.
[2007]
1.8.33 Advise people who have made an uncomplicated recovery after their MI that they
can resume sexual activity when they feel comfortable to do so, usually after
about 4 weeks. [2007]
1.8.34 Raise the subject of sexual activity within the context of cardiac rehabilitation and
aftercare for people who have had an MI. [2007]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
1.9 Lifestyle changes after an MI
Changing diet
1.9.1 Advise people to eat a Mediterranean-style diet (more bread, fruit, vegetables
and fish; less meat; and replace butter and cheese with products based on plant
oils). [2007]
1.9.2 Do not routinely recommend eating oily fish for the sole purpose of preventing
another MI. If people choose to consume oily fish after an MI, be aware that there
is no evidence of harm, and fish may form part of a Mediterranean-style diet.
[2013]
1.9.3 Do not offer or advise people to use the following to prevent another MI:
• omega-3 fatty acid capsules
• omega-3 fatty acid supplemented foods. [2013]
1.9.4 If people choose to take omega-3 fatty acid capsules or eat omega-3 fatty acid
supplemented foods, be aware that there is no evidence of harm. [2013]
1.9.5 Advise people not to take supplements containing beta-carotene. Do not
recommend antioxidant supplements (vitamin E and/or C) or folic acid to reduce
cardiovascular risk. [2007]
1.9.6 Offer people an individual consultation to discuss diet, including their current
eating habits, and advice on improving their diet. [2007]
1.9.7 Give people consistent dietary advice tailored to their needs. [2007]
1.9.8 Give people healthy eating advice that can be extended to the whole family.
[2007]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Alcohol consumption
1.9.9 For advice on alcohol consumption, see the UK government drinking guidelines.
[2020]
Regular physical activity
1.9.10 Advise people to undertake regular physical activity sufficient to increase
exercise capacity. [2007]
1.9.11 Advise people to be physically active for 20 to 30 minutes a day to the point of
slight breathlessness. Advise people who are not active to this level to increase
their activity in a gradual, step-by-step way, aiming to increase their exercise
capacity. They should start at a level that is comfortable, and increase the
duration and intensity of activity as they gain fitness. [2007]
1.9.12 Advice on physical activity should involve a discussion about current and past
activity levels and preferences. The benefit of exercise may be enhanced by
tailored advice from a suitably qualified professional. [2007]
Smoking cessation
1.9.13 Advise all people who smoke to stop and offer assistance from a smoking
cessation service in line with the NICE guideline on tobacco. [2007]
1.9.14 If a person is unable or unwilling to accept a referral to a stop smoking service,
they should be offered pharmacotherapy in line with the NICE guideline on
tobacco. [2007, amended 2020]
Weight management
1.9.15 After an MI, offer all people who are overweight or obese advice and support to
achieve and maintain a healthy weight in line with the NICE guideline on
overweight and obesity management. [2007]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Terms used in this guideline
Bailout glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
Bailout glycoprotein inhibitor (GPI) refers to the use of GPI when the PCI operator has not
intended to use GPI from the outset, but considers that clinical or angiographic features
(such as worsening or persistent thrombus burden) have changed during the course of the
procedure, such that there may be benefit to giving the patient GPI.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Recommendations for research
The guideline committee has made the following recommendations for research.
Key recommendations for research
1 Dual antiplatelet therapy for people aged 75 and over
What is the most clinically and cost-effective dual antiplatelet therapy for people aged
75 and over with an acute coronary syndrome, who are having percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI)? [2020]
Why this is important
The evidence reviewed for this guideline found that prasugrel is the most clinically and
cost-effective antiplatelet therapy when used with aspirin for the general acute coronary
syndrome population having PCI, particularly for people with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (STEMI). However, the summary of product characteristics for
prasugrel states that its use in people aged 75 and over 'is generally not recommended
and should only be undertaken with caution after a careful individual benefit/risk
evaluation by the prescribing physician indicates that benefits in terms of prevention of
ischaemic events outweigh the risk of serious bleedings'. There were not enough data
available for this guideline to determine whether prasugrel is less effective, or even
harmful, in people aged 75 and over. Further research is needed to determine the optimal
dual antiplatelet therapy for this group of older people.
2 Primary PCI and fibrinolysis in people with acute STEMI who
have a long anticipated transfer time for primary PCI
In people with acute STEMI who present more than 1 hour after the onset of symptoms, is
a primary PCI-related delay of 120 to 180 minutes associated with outcomes similar to,
better or worse than pre-hospital administered fibrinolysis? [2013]

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Why this is important
Primary PCI is the preferred coronary reperfusion therapy provided it can be delivered 'in a
timely fashion'. It is suggested that primary PCI is the preferred reperfusion strategy for
primary PCI-related delays of at least up to 2 hours. However, there is inadequate
evidence to conclude whether primary PCI is still preferable at primary PCI-related time
delays of more than 2 hours.
No specifically designed randomised controlled trial (RCT) or observational study has
addressed the issue of the extent to which primary PCI-related time delay (and other
factors such as presentation delay and a person's risk profile) diminishes the advantages
of primary PCI over fibrinolysis. For example, in more geographically remote areas, a short
presentation delay together with an anticipated long primary PCI-related delay could
favour a strategy of pre-hospital fibrinolysis.
To answer this question, an RCT of pre-hospital fibrinolysis versus primary PCI in people
with acute STEMI who have a primary PCI-related time delay of 2 hours or more is needed.
Primary endpoints would include cardiovascular and all-cause mortality and other major
adverse cardiovascular events.
3 Ischaemia testing
What is the role of ischaemia testing in people after an acute coronary syndrome and what
is the comparative efficacy and cost effectiveness of the different non-invasive tests (for
example, stress electrocardiogram [ECG], echocardiography, radionuclide scanning and
MRI)? [2010]
Why this is important
An increasing number of non-invasive tests are now available for the investigation of
suspected myocardial ischaemia. These tests need different equipment, different clinical
expertise, come at different costs and may differ in their ability to detect and quantify
myocardial ischaemia. Their place in the routine investigation of patients admitted with
unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
(particularly those who have not undergone angiography), as opposed to their selective
use, is not clear. Management of unstable angina and NSTEMI would be enhanced if the
relative place of these investigations were better understood and an assessment of their
cost effectiveness made.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
4 Relationship between volume of procedures and clinical
outcomes
What is the relationship between hospital volume of primary PCI procedures and optimal
outcomes in people with acute STEMI? [2013]
Why this is important
There is a suggestion that outcomes may be better in larger-volume primary PCI units, and
some retrospective registries have reported data to support this. However, the quality of
the data is poor and still leaves the question open. In the UK, primary PCI is provided by
units that vary greatly in the number of cases per year. The development of services has
been ad hoc and not designed specifically around the provision of primary PCI. If it was
possible to conclusively show that people were or were not better off having treatment in
larger-volume units, then it would have important implications for the national provision of
primary PCI.
5 Risk assessment – risk scoring systems
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness of the systematic use of risk scoring systems (in
addition to clinical assessment) for ischaemic outcomes and bleeding complications in the
management of unstable angina and NSTEMI (at all levels of risk) compared with clinical
assessment alone? [2010]
Why this is important
Most risk scoring systems currently predict the likelihood of mortality or ischaemic
cardiovascular events at various times after a patient's admission to hospital with an acute
coronary syndrome. A number of interventions (such as drugs and revascularisation
procedures) have been shown to reduce these adverse outcomes. This effect tends to be
greatest in patients at highest risk. However, as a broad generalisation, patients who are at
highest ischaemic risk are also those who are at higher risk of bleeding complications
associated with the use of multiple antiplatelet and antithrombin agents. There are fewer
scoring systems that predict bleeding risk, but we know that bleeding complications are
associated with a significantly worse outcome. Using a combination of scoring systems
assessing ischaemic and bleeding risk when evaluating data from randomised trials and
registries may help to determine where the net clinical benefit (reduction in ischaemic risk
minus any increase in bleeding risk) lies.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Other recommendations for research
6 Risk assessment – data from cardiac registries
For patients with unstable angina and NSTEMI (at differing levels of risk), how do clinical
outcome data (adverse cardiovascular events and bleeding complications) collected in
cardiac registries compare with data derived from RCTs? [2010]
Why this is important
Patients recruited to participate in clinical trials are often highly selected; trials tend not to
include patients who are very elderly, are at high risk, or have significant comorbidity. On
the other hand, good registry data include information on all patients, but are
observational and not randomised. Often there is uncertainty about how the outcome data
from RCTs can be applied to the much larger unselected population of patients admitted to
UK hospitals with unstable angina or NSTEMI. A greater understanding of the differences
between RCT and registry populations, and their levels of ischaemic and bleeding risk
would help inform future management. Collection of well-validated registry data is
essential if conclusions from RCTs are to be applied appropriately to all patients with
unstable angina and NSTEMI, not just to patients who are comparable to trial populations.
7 Management of hyperglycaemia
What is the optimal management of hyperglycaemia in people with acute coronary
syndrome who have diagnosed or previously undiagnosed diabetes? [2011]
Why this is important
Existing studies on the optimal management of hyperglycaemia in people who have acute
coronary syndrome and diagnosed or previously undiagnosed diabetes are generally of
poor quality.
It is recommended that a large RCT is conducted for people with acute coronary syndrome
and hyperglycaemia (blood glucose 11 mmol/litre and over) stratified by NSTEMI and
STEMI and by known diabetes and without a previous diagnosis of diabetes.
The interventions for the trial should be intravenous insulin or subcutaneous insulin

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
administered within 4 hours of presentation to hospital. The aim is to achieve blood
glucose between 6 and 11 mmol/litre for at least 24 hours. The comparator should be
standard care.
8 Beta-blockers
Does continuing beta-blocker treatment beyond 1 year after a myocardial infarction (MI)
improve outcomes for people with normal left ventricular systolic function? [2013]
Why this is important
Recent cohort studies have suggested that continuing treatment with a beta-blocker
beyond a year after an acute MI may not confer any benefit to the person in terms of
reduced morbidity or mortality. This is particularly relevant given recent changes in acute
management strategies. While beta-blockers are valuable in reducing mortality and
morbidity for up to a year after an MI, they have side effects and represent an additional
treatment burden to people who are already taking many other medications. However,
there is also some suggestion that there are risks associated with withdrawal of beta-
blockers in this population. The balance of risks and benefits of long-term beta blockade
has not been clearly determined, particularly in the context of modern acute treatment of
MI.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Rationale and impact
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the recommendations and how
they might affect practice.
Dual antiplatelet therapy for acute STEMI intended
for primary PCI
Recommendation 1.1.11
Why the committee made the recommendation
Evidence was reviewed comparing the clinical effectiveness of clopidogrel, prasugrel and
ticagrelor, each in combination with aspirin, at time-points of 30 days and 1 year. Prasugrel
and ticagrelor were more effective than clopidogrel at both time-points. In a network
meta-analysis of the 30-day data, prasugrel was more effective than ticagrelor, although
with some uncertainty around this conclusion. Prasugrel was more effective than ticagrelor
at 1 year with noteworthy differences in all-cause mortality and re-infarction. A detailed
cost-effectiveness analysis was also performed incorporating data at both time-points
with either prasugrel or ticagrelor being most cost effective in different scenarios using
different clinical data. The results favouring prasugrel were driven by the ISAR-REACT 5
trial that directly compared ticagrelor and prasugrel and these were considered the most
relevant. The committee agreed that clinical evidence and cost-effectiveness results are
directly applicable to the treatment of ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
in the NHS, and recommended prasugrel for people with STEMI undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI).
The final wording of the recommendation reflects the wording of the summary of product
characteristics for prasugrel. If there is particular concern about bleeding risk from
prasugrel in a person aged 75 or over, either ticagrelor or clopidogrel might be used
instead; although ticagrelor is the more cost effective of the two, it also carries a higher
bleeding risk.
An exception was added for people needing anticoagulation for a separate reason (for
example, ongoing atrial fibrillation). For these people, clopidogrel is preferred because of

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
the high bleeding risk of full anticoagulation plus prasugrel.
How the recommendation might affect practice
In the UK, prasugrel is currently used less than ticagrelor or clopidogrel. The
recommendation will therefore require a change in prescribing for most centres, but should
be easily achievable. Prasugrel costs less than ticagrelor, but considerably more than
clopidogrel, and although some areas will see a cost saving from switching to prasugrel
from ticagrelor, the overall effect of this recommendation will be an increase in cost to the
NHS.
Return to recommendations
Antithrombin therapy during primary PCI for acute
STEMI
Recommendations 1.1.12 and 1.1.13
Why the committee made the recommendations
When considering the evidence on the effectiveness of bivalirudin for people with acute
STEMI undergoing primary PCI, the committee gave more weight to studies that were
closest to current UK practice. These included studies that used bailout or selective,
rather than routine, glycoprotein inhibitors (GPIs) and radial artery rather than femoral
artery access. The committee concluded that there was no convincing difference between
bivalirudin and the main alternative, heparin, in terms of mortality, and that bivalirudin is
inferior to heparin in reducing the need for subsequent unplanned revascularisation. The
committee discussed data on bleeding risk and agreed that there is no clinically significant
difference between bivalirudin and heparin when radial access is used, but bivalirudin
probably lowers the bleeding risk when access via the femoral artery is needed. The
committee noted that heparin is cheaper than bivalirudin and easier to administer.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The committee agreed that the recommendations generally reflect current practice and
are not expected to result in a substantial resource impact to the NHS in England.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Return to recommendations
Complete revascularisation with PCI or culprit
vessel only PCI for acute STEMI
Recommendations 1.1.16 and 1.1.17
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence showed that complete revascularisation with multivessel PCI reduced
cardiovascular mortality, myocardial infarction (MI) and repeat revascularisation at 1 year,
compared with culprit vessel only PCI for people with acute STEMI without cardiogenic
shock. It was also associated with lower overall costs.
Although the evidence clearly favoured complete revascularisation, there was less
certainty about the timing of the non-culprit procedure. There are a number of different
possible approaches to multivessel PCI: undertaking multivessel revascularisation at the
time of primary PCI; treating the culprit vessel during the primary procedure and then
bringing the person back to the catheter laboratory for revascularisation of other vessels
later in the index admission; or treating the culprit vessel during primary PCI, discharging
the person and then electively readmitting them for further revascularisation. The
committee agreed that multivessel PCI during the index admission should be considered,
either at the time of primary PCI or later during the same admission. They were concerned
that the clinical benefits may be lower and costs may be higher when people are
discharged and readmitted, and noted that delaying treatment of the non-culprit lesions is
worrying for patients. However, they agreed that the optimal timing within the index
admission will depend on a number of variables and is best left to the discretion of the
clinical team.
People with cardiogenic shock were excluded from these studies of multivessel PCI and
the committee agreed that, in view of the results from the separate CULPRIT-SHOCK trial,
it was not appropriate to recommend multivessel PCI for this group during the index
admission.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Current practice is variable across centres and also within centres. Some offer multivessel

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
PCI during the first procedure for acute STEMI but others may postpone this (either to
later within the index admission or to a later readmission). Some operate on the culprit
vessel only. The recommendations are therefore likely to result in a change in practice, but
not for all centres or all professionals performing PCI. Because the recommendations allow
for multivessel PCI to be either at the time of primary PCI or later within the index
admission, they offer flexibility to accommodate situations in which there are a number of
other people waiting for primary PCI. Healthcare professionals can move on to treat the
next person after completing revascularisation of the culprit vessel, minimising the overall
impact on primary PCI services.
There will be a resource impact for centres not currently undertaking multivessel PCI,
because multivessel PCI has higher costs than culprit vessel only PCI. Audit data reported
by MINAP (the Myocardial Ischaemia National Audit Project) between April 2016 and March
2017 show there were 33,797 cases of STEMI reported in England, Wales, Northern Ireland
and the Isle of Man. It is estimated that around 30% will present with multivessel disease,
which would be around 10,000 people. However, it is unclear for how many of these people
multivessel PCI would be suitable. The change from current practice is likely to be cost
saving overall because of the reduction in later revascularisation procedures.
Return to recommendations
Drug-eluting stents
Recommendations 1.1.18 and 1.2.18
Why the committee made the recommendations
Evidence from angiography studies showed that drug-eluting stents are less likely to fail
than bare metal stents in terms of both recurrence of obstruction to the target vessel and
the need for further revascularisation. The evidence also shows that drug-eluting stents
may be beneficial in reducing deaths (all-cause and cardiac) and there is a reduced
incidence of MI in the 3 years after revascularisation when drug-eluting stents are used.
Costs of drug-eluting stents are higher than bare metal stents, but analyses using current
cost and benefit data suggest that they are a cost-effective use of resources.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
How the recommendations might affect practice
The use of drug-eluting stents has been slowly increasing over recent years in the UK and
the most recent national audit data show that 91% of PCIs for acute coronary syndromes
used stents and 97% of these used drug-eluting stents. The recommendation will
therefore involve little change from current practice and will not have a substantial
resource impact for the NHS in England.
Return to recommendations
Antiplatelet therapy for STEMI not treated with
PCI
Recommendations 1.1.24 and 1.1.25
Why the committee made the recommendations
The UK licence for prasugrel is for people with acute coronary syndrome who are
proceeding to coronary angiography with a view to PCI. Although this is usual practice for
most people with STEMI, for some people, either medical management without coronary
revascularisation or coronary artery surgery are better options. Direct evidence in these
patient groups was lacking; the evidence comparing the clinical effectiveness of
clopidogrel and ticagrelor was largely for people receiving PCI. This showed convincing
superiority of ticagrelor in reducing mortality (cardiac and all-cause) and in preventing
re-infarction and the need for future revascularisation procedures, although there was
some evidence of an increased risk of bleeding complications. The committee agreed to
recommend ticagrelor for people with STEMI having medical management unless they are
at high risk of bleeding when clopidogrel or no second antiplatelet may be the safer
option. However, the committee were aware that some of the excess bleeding risk comes
from complications of a PCI procedure, which is not relevant to this particular group of
people with acute coronary syndrome. They therefore made a recommendation to offer
ticagrelor in most cases but to consider clopidogrel as an alternative when the bleeding
risk is high.
How the recommendations might affect practice
In the UK, both ticagrelor and clopidogrel are currently used for STEMI that is managed

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
without PCI. The recommendations require a change in practice for most, but not all,
people who would otherwise receive clopidogrel. Ticagrelor costs considerably more than
clopidogrel, and although the recommendations apply to a minority of people with STEMI,
the effect will be an increase in cost to the NHS.
Return to recommendations
Initial antithrombin therapy for unstable angina
and NSTEMI
Recommendations 1.2.3 and 1.2.16
Why the committee made the recommendations
The 2010 NICE guideline on unstable angina and NSTEMI recommended fondaparinux
rather than low molecular weight heparin for initial management. The recommendation was
based mainly on evidence from a single large study (the OASIS-5 study). This study
showed a small risk of catheter thrombosis when fondaparinux was the only antithrombin
used before angiography, and therefore the 2010 guideline recommended not to use
fondaparinux when angiography is planned within 24 hours. The thrombosis risk was
noted by the OASIS-5 investigators before the study ended, and in the later phase of the
study, people were given intravenous unfractionated heparin with fondaparinux during
angiography; this appeared to remove the excess risk of catheter thrombosis. Two further
small studies published after 2010 have confirmed that giving unfractionated heparin
during angiography to people already receiving fondaparinux removed the excess risk of
catheter thrombosis. The committee considered that unfractionated heparin is already
used in this way in many centres, agreed with the 2010 guideline that fondaparinux is the
most cost-effective option, and were able to remove the caveat about avoiding
fondaparinux if catheterisation is planned within 24 hours. They recommended that
fondaparinux should be given to people who are not at high risk of bleeding unless they
are having immediate angiography. People receiving fondaparinux should be given
additional systemic unfractionated heparin in the catheter laboratory.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Fondaparinux is already used before angiography in many centres in the UK, with
additional unfractionated heparin given during the procedure. The recommendations will

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
affect those centres currently withholding fondaparinux from people having angiography in
the next 24 hours. Fondaparinux is a cheaper option than low molecular weight heparin so
the recommendation could be cost saving in these centres.
Return to recommendations
Early invasive versus conservative management for
unstable angina and NSTEMI
Recommendations 1.2.12 to 1.2.15 and 1.2.20
Why the committee made the recommendations
The 2010 guideline on unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI)
recommended a comprehensive assessment of baseline risk of adverse events. The
committee agreed that this should influence the choice between early invasive
intervention (coronary angiography, with PCI if indicated) and conservative management
(initial medical management, proceeding to coronary angiography and PCI if there is
evidence of recurrent ischaemia). Studies comparing these options show a short-term
harm with an invasive strategy, but this is offset by the clinical benefits in the months
following the procedure. A cost-effectiveness analysis found that routine early invasive
intervention was cost effective in people at higher risk of adverse events, but conservative
management was the most cost-effective option for people at lower risk. This was
because overall health gains were greater in those at higher baseline risk.
Most of the evidence was already available at the time of the 2010 guideline, and the
committee recognised that the data may be less applicable to modern practice than had
been the case in 2010. Nonetheless, they agreed that early angiography should be the
default recommendation for most people at intermediate or higher baseline risk of adverse
outcomes. They accepted the previous committee's interpretation of the appropriate risk
cut-offs based on their detailed work mapping of the evidence to real-world UK risk data.
However, the committee also recognised that the risk prediction models might be less
applicable to the youngest people with unstable angina and NSTEMI who are relatively
under-represented in the dataset, and therefore added a cautionary recommendation to
this effect.
The committee noted that the 2010 guideline had recommended that angiography should

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
be done within 96 hours of admission for those who are likely to benefit from an early
invasive strategy. However, they considered this a conservative target and knew that
angiography within 72 hours is now common practice. This allows time for a correct
diagnosis, immediate stabilisation and treatment of symptoms, and transfer to a centre
with PCI facilities if necessary. The available evidence does not permit a definitive
statement about the optimal timing, but a recommendation to consider angiography within
72 hours was agreed.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendations largely reflect current NHS practice. Although the timeframe for
early invasive management has been reduced from 96 hours, 72 hours has been specified
in the NICE quality standard for a number of years and a best practice tariff on the same
basis was introduced in 2017. Audit data are only currently available from the same year as
the introduction of the tariff and report that, of people who are admitted to a hospital that
can perform angiography, 56% received angiography within 72 hours and 69% within
96 hours. The proportion receiving angiography within 72 hours is likely to be higher since
the introduction of the best practice tariff. Performing angiography earlier is likely to result
in a shorter hospital stay. The recommendations are unlikely to result in a substantial
resource impact for the NHS.
Return to recommendations
Antiplatelet therapy for unstable angina and
NSTEMI
Recommendations 1.2.6, 1.2.17, 1.2.21 and 1.2.22
Why the committee made the recommendations
Dual antiplatelet therapy on initial presentation
The committee agreed that dual antiplatelet therapy should not be offered to people with
chest pain before a diagnosis of unstable angina or NSTEMI is made. In their experience,
dual antiplatelet therapy had caused harm (bleeding) in some people presenting with
chest pain not caused by an acute coronary syndrome.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Unstable angina and NSTEMI intended for PCI
Evidence was reviewed comparing the clinical effectiveness of clopidogrel, prasugrel and
ticagrelor, each in combination with aspirin, at time-points of 30 days and 1 year. A
detailed cost-effectiveness analysis for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI
undergoing PCI was performed incorporating these data. Although the overall conclusion
was that prasugrel is a more effective agent than ticagrelor, which in turn is more effective
than clopidogrel, there was considerable uncertainty around the cost-effectiveness
results, with either prasugrel or ticagrelor being most cost effective in different scenarios
using different clinical data. The results favouring prasugrel were driven by the
ISAR-REACT 5 trial, in which time to angiography was much shorter than is currently
achieved in the UK for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI. This could cause practical
difficulty in using prasugrel because its licence effectively prevents its use before
angiography, and this could leave people with unstable angina or NSTEMI without dual
antiplatelet therapy for several days. The committee therefore recommended either
prasugrel or ticagrelor for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI intended for PCI,
depending on individual circumstances. The final wording of the recommendation reflects
the wording of the summary of product characteristics for prasugrel.
Unstable angina and NSTEMI – management when PCI is not indicated
Although many people with unstable angina or NSTEMI proceed to PCI, for some medical
management without coronary revascularisation or coronary artery surgery are better
options. Prasugrel is not licensed in these circumstances. The evidence available for
medical management shows better outcomes with ticagrelor than clopidogrel. This is
consistent with results from the larger datasets for people having PCI. The committee
therefore recommended ticagrelor for people with unstable angina or NSTEMI having
either medical management without coronary revascularisation or coronary artery surgery.
However, the committee also noted that clopidogrel may be the safer agent for people
who are at high risk of bleeding but still need dual antiplatelet therapy, although this is
based on evidence of higher bleeding risk with ticagrelor in people with an acute coronary
syndrome generally rather than specific evidence from those at higher risk. They therefore
made a recommendation to consider using clopidogrel in this situation.
How the recommendations might affect practice
In the UK, prasugrel is currently used less than ticagrelor or clopidogrel. The
recommendations may therefore involve a change in practice for some centres. Prasugrel

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
costs less than ticagrelor, but considerably more than clopidogrel, and although some
areas will see a cost saving from switching to prasugrel from ticagrelor, others will see an
increase where either prasugrel or ticagrelor is used instead of clopidogrel. The overall
effect of these recommendations will be an increase in cost to the NHS.
Return to recommendations
Antiplatelet therapy for people with an indication
for anticoagulation
Recommendations 1.4.21 to 1.4.25
Why the committee made the recommendations
The committee noted that current practice is to use dual antiplatelet therapy at the time of
PCI, and found no evidence to recommend changing this practice for people who are on an
anticoagulant at the time of admission. In practice, the anticoagulant will often be
suspended for a short period (perhaps using heparin cover). The evidence available
showed that continuing dual antiplatelet therapy plus an anticoagulant after the acute PCI
phase increases the risk of bleeding complications, and so a recommendation raising
awareness of this issue was included. The committee therefore agreed that either aspirin
or the second antiplatelet agent should be stopped, but unfortunately there was no
evidence to show at what point this should happen.
In the absence of any conclusive data, recommendations for treatment after the initial
phase were based on the knowledge and experience of the committee. For people who
have had PCI and stent insertion, they agreed that it would be safest to combine an
anticoagulant with a potent antiplatelet agent (clopidogrel), whereas for those who have
had medical management or had angioplasty without stenting, the anticoagulant should be
combined with aspirin. There was not enough evidence for the committee to recommend a
particular anticoagulant.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Current practice is variable, with people taking different combinations of antiplatelets and
anticoagulants. The number of people affected is small. It is estimated that between 5%
and 15% of people with an acute coronary syndrome will have an indication for oral

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
anticoagulation. The recommendations are mostly unchanged from the 2013 guideline and
the minor changes that have been made are unlikely to result in a substantial resource
impact for the NHS in England.
Return to recommendations
Duration of beta-blocker treatment after an MI
Recommendations 1.4.29 and 1.4.30
Why the committee made the recommendations
There was no direct evidence on the optimal duration of beta-blocker treatment for people
who have had an MI but do not have reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. The 2013
guideline recommended beta-blocker treatment for at least 12 months. In the absence of
any conclusive evidence, the committee agreed that they could not recommend a definite
time for stopping treatment. However, they agreed that healthcare professionals should
discuss the absence of clear evidence for benefit of continuing beyond 12 months with
people taking beta-blockers after an MI who have normal left ventricular function. This
should prompt a personalised approach to stopping or continuing beta-blockers based on
the person's attitude to risk and experience of side effects.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Beta-blockers are currently offered for at least 12 months after an MI to people without
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Audit data show that around 97% of people with
MI are discharged on beta-blockers. A discussion of the absence of clear evidence for
benefit of continuing treatment beyond 12 months is likely to lead to more people deciding
to stop treatment at this point. Any reduction in prescriptions for beta-blockers will be cost
saving.
Return to recommendations

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Context
Acute coronary syndromes due to ischaemic heart disease remain a significant cause of
morbidity and mortality. In 2015, heart disease remained the leading cause of death in men
and the second most common cause of death in women in England. In 2015/16, more than
58,000 people were admitted to hospital in England with a heart attack. Although many
more people now survive than in the past, there remains considerable scope to reduce
their future risk of death, angina, heart failure and further heart attack.
National audits continue to show variation in practice across the UK in the treatments
offered for acute coronary syndromes. This, combined with evidence of novel ways of
treating acute coronary syndromes and updates to existing treatments, indicates a need
for an updated guideline that will help deliver best practice to the large number of people
receiving treatment for acute coronary syndromes in the NHS.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Finding more information and committee
details
To find NICE guidance on related topics, including guidance in development, see the NICE
topic page on cardiovascular conditions.
For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the
evidence reviews. You can also find information about how the guideline was developed,
including details of the committee.
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For
general help and advice on putting our guidelines into practice, see resources to help you
put NICE guidance into practice.

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Update information
November 2020: This guideline updates:
• NICE guideline CG172 (published November 2013)
• NICE guideline CG167 (published July 2013)
• NICE technology appraisal guidance 230 (published July 2011)
• NICE guideline CG94 (published March 2010)
• NICE technology appraisal guidance 152 (published July 2008)
• NICE technology appraisal guidance 71 (published October 2003).
It incorporates unchanged NICE guideline CG130 (published October 2011).
We have reviewed the evidence on dual antiplatelet therapy, early angiography for
unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI),
antithrombin therapy before percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), complete
revascularisation versus culprit vessel only PCI for ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI), drug-eluting stents, combination antiplatelet and anticoagulant
treatment for people with a separate indication for anticoagulation, and duration of beta-
blocker treatment for people with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction after MI. We
have made new recommendations. These recommendations are marked [2020].
We have also made some changes without an evidence review:
• We have aligned terminology with the NICE guideline on chronic heart failure in adults.
• We have clarified advice on drug therapy for secondary prevention to indicate that
dual antiplatelet therapy may not be suitable for people with a separate indication for
anticoagulation.
• We have indicated when to offer a cardiology assessment to someone who has had a
previous MI.
These recommendations are marked [2007, amended 2020].

Acute coronary syndromes (NG185)
Minor changes since publication
December 2024: We added links to relevant technology appraisal guidance in the sections
on dual antiplatelet therapy, coronary angiography with follow-on PCI, drug therapy for
secondary prevention and people with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction.
December 2021: Following a surveillance review we have updated recommendation 1.3.7
to say that either glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) or fasting blood glucose may be used
to test for diabetes. Recommendation 1.3.3 on using both tests before discharge from
hospital in people with hyperglycaemia after acute coronary syndrome has not changed.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3902-2
