=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "apixaban-for-preventing-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-people-with-nonvalvular-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82600614137797.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:01.801303",
  "file_size_bytes": 199274,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/apixaban-for-preventing-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-people-with-nonvalvular-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82600614137797.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Apixaban for preventing
stroke and systemic
embolism in people with
non-valvular atrial
fibrillation
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 27 February 2013
Last updated: 2 July 2021
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta275
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 3 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
Contents
1 Recommendations ................................................................................................................. 4
2 The technology ...................................................................................................................... 5
3 The manufacturer's submission ........................................................................................... 6
4 Consideration of the evidence ............................................................................................. 19
5 Implementation ...................................................................................................................... 27
6 Recommendations for further research .............................................................................. 28
7 Appraisal Committee members, and NICE project team ................................................... 29
Appraisal Committee members ......................................................................................................... 29
NICE project team ............................................................................................................................... 31
8 Sources of evidence considered by the Committee ......................................................... 32
Update information .................................................................................................................. 35
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 4 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
This guidance should be read in conjunction with NG196.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Apixaban is recommended as an option for preventing stroke and systemic
embolism within its marketing authorisation, that is, in people with non-valvular
atrial fibrillation with 1 or more risk factors such as:
• prior stroke or transient ischaemic attack
• age 75 years or older
• hypertension
• diabetes mellitus
• symptomatic heart failure.
1.2 Decide whether to start treatment with apixaban after an informed discussion
with the person about its risks and benefits compared with warfarin, dabigatran
etexilate, edoxaban and rivaroxaban. For people taking warfarin, consider the
potential risks and benefits of switching to apixaban taking into account their
level of international normalised ratio (INR) control.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 5 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
2 The technology
2.1 Apixaban (Eliquis, Bristol–Myers Squibb and Pfizer) is a potent, oral, direct and
highly selective active site inhibitor of factor Xa. By inhibiting factor Xa, apixaban
prevents thrombin generation and thrombus development. Apixaban 5 mg twice
daily and 2.5 mg twice daily has a European marketing authorisation for the
'prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in adult patients with non-valvular
atrial fibrillation, with 1 or more risk factors, such as prior stroke or transient
ischaemic attack, age 75 years or older, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or
symptomatic heart failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class 2 or higher)'.
2.2 The summary of product characteristics lists the following adverse reactions for
apixaban: epistaxis (nosebleed), contusion (bruising), haematuria (blood in urine),
haematoma, eye haemorrhage, and gastrointestinal haemorrhage. For full details
of adverse reactions and contraindications, see the summary of product
characteristics.
2.3 The manufacturer has stated that the cost per day for both doses (2.5 mg and
5 mg twice daily) of apixaban (excluding VAT) is £2.20, and the annual cost is
£803. Costs may vary in different settings because of negotiated procurement
discounts.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 6 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
3 The manufacturer's submission
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by the manufacturer of apixaban
and a review of this submission by the Evidence Review Group (ERG).
3.1 The main clinical effectiveness evidence for apixaban came from 2 international,
multicentre, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled, randomised
controlled trials, which had investigated apixaban. ARISTOTLE (n=18,201)
compared apixaban (5 mg twice daily; 2.5 mg twice daily in selected patients)
with warfarin (in patients with an international normalised ratio [INR] target range
of 2.0 to 3.0). AVERROES (n=5,598) compared apixaban (5 mg twice daily; 2.5 mg
twice daily in selected patients) with aspirin (81 mg to 324 mg once daily) in
people 50 years or older with atrial fibrillation and at least 1 additional risk factor
for stroke for whom treatment with warfarin had failed, or for whom warfarin was
unsuitable or who were unwilling to take warfarin.
3.2 The primary objective of ARISTOTLE was to determine if apixaban was non-
inferior to warfarin for the combined end point of stroke and systemic embolism.
Stroke included both ischaemic stroke, caused by embolism from the heart, and
haemorrhagic stroke, which can be a complication of anticoagulant treatment
(although it may also occur spontaneously or as a result of secondary
haemorrhage into an ischaemic stroke). ARISTOTLE included adults with atrial
fibrillation or atrial flutter not resulting from a reversible cause and at least
1 additional risk factor for stroke (assessed by CHADS criteria). It enrolled
2
patients from 39 countries; 40% of participants were from Europe and this
included patients from 41 sites in the UK. The average age was 69 years and 65%
of the population were male. The mean time in therapeutic range for patients in
the warfarin arm was 62.2%, and the median time in therapeutic range was 66%.
Approximately 4% of the study population received 2.5 mg apixaban (those who
had 2 or more of the following criteria: 80 years or older, a body weight of 60 kg
or less, or a serum creatinine level of 1.5 mg/100 ml [133 micromole/l] or more).
The mean CHADS score at baseline was 2.1 and approximately 65% of patients
2
had a CHADS score of 2 or more.
2
3.3 In the intention-to-treat population, apixaban met non-inferiority criteria using a
non-inferiority margin of 1.38, over a median follow-up of 1.8 years. Apixaban was
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 7 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
associated with a significantly lower rate of stroke and systemic embolism than
warfarin (hazard ratio [HR] 0.79, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.66 to 0.95,
p=0.01). The rate of fatal or disabling stroke was significantly lower in the
apixaban group than the warfarin group (HR 0.71, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.94). When the
outcomes included in the composite primary outcome (ischaemic or uncertain
type, haemorrhagic stroke and systemic embolism) were analysed separately,
apixaban was associated with a significant reduction in haemorrhagic stroke
compared with warfarin (HR 0.51, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.75), but the decrease for
apixaban compared with warfarin in ischaemic or uncertain type stroke or
systemic embolism was not statistically significant (ischaemic or uncertain type
stroke HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.74 to 1.13, p=0.42; systemic embolism HR 0.87, 95% CI
0.44 to 1.75, p=0.70). The rates of myocardial infarction, and pulmonary embolism
or deep vein thrombosis, were lower with apixaban than warfarin, but were not
statistically significant (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.66 to 1.17, p=0.37, and HR 0.78, 95% CI
0.29 to 2.10, p=0.63 respectively). Apixaban was associated with fewer all-cause
deaths than warfarin, which was of borderline statistical significance (3.52% and
3.94% respectively [HR 0.89, 95% CI 0.80 to 0.99, p=0.047]).
3.4 The manufacturer presented results for the primary efficacy outcomes for 21 pre-
specified subgroups in ARISTOTLE including subgroups broken down by baseline
risk of stroke or systemic embolism (grouped by CHADS scores of 1 or less;
2
2; and 3 or more). ARISTOTLE was not statistically powered to demonstrate
superiority in subgroup analyses. The hazard ratios for apixaban relative to
warfarin for stroke and systemic embolism in the 3 stroke risk subgroups were
consistently less than 1, but the confidence intervals of the CHADS ≤1 and
2
2 groups crossed 1, meaning that that the difference between apixaban and
warfarin was not statistically significant for these groups. The hazard ratios for
stroke and systemic embolism in the groups of patients who received 5 mg and
2.5 mg apixaban were also both below 1 (the hazard ratios for CHADS score
2
subgroups and for the groups of patients who received 5 mg and 2.5 mg
apixaban are commercial-in-confidence). The manufacturer also presented data
for subgroups based on INR (international normalised ratio) control using
quartiles of centre time in therapeutic range (less than 58.0%, 58.0% to 65.7%,
65.7% to 72.2% and more than 72.2%). A centre's time in therapeutic range was
calculated as the median of individual time in therapeutic ranges among the
centre's patients on warfarin. The manufacturer reported that the benefits of
apixaban over warfarin in preventing stroke or systemic embolism were
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 8 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
consistent (HR <1) regardless of INR control (centre time in therapeutic
range <58.0% [HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.06], centre time in therapeutic
range 58.0% to 65.7% [HR 0.80, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.15], centre time in therapeutic
range 65.7% to 72.2% [HR 0.79, 95% CI 0.54 to 1.13], centre time in therapeutic
range greater than 72.2% [HR 0.81, 95% CI 0.52 to 1.26]).
3.5 The adverse events and safety analyses were reported for the on-treatment
population in ARISTOTLE (all patients who received at least 1 dose of study
medication). Apixaban was superior to warfarin for the primary safety outcome of
time from first dose of study drug to first occurrence of confirmed International
Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) major bleeding (HR 0.69, 95% CI
0.60 to 0.80; p<0.001). Apixaban resulted in significantly fewer bleeding events
than warfarin for all of the major bleed types (intracranial major bleeding HR 0.42,
95% CI 0.30 to 0.58; other location major bleeding HR 0.79, 95% CI 0.68 to 0.93)
and clinically relevant non-major bleeding events reported by the manufacturer
apart from major gastrointestinal bleeding, for which the difference between
apixaban and warfarin was not statistically significant (HR 0.89, 95% CI 0.70 to
1.15, p=0.37). There were similar proportions of patients who experienced
adverse events with apixaban (81.5%) and warfarin (83.1%) and a lower
proportion of patients who experienced bleeding adverse events with apixaban
(25.2%) compared with warfarin (32.7%). Serious adverse events occurred in
35.0% of patients treated with apixaban and 36.5% of patients treated with
warfarin. Fewer patients stopped the study drug in the apixaban group than the
warfarin group (25.3% compared with 27.5% respectively, p=0.001); 7.6% of
patients in the apixaban arm and 8.4% of patients in the warfarin arm stopped
treatment because of an adverse event. The safety of apixaban was maintained
across patients at different levels of stroke risk, regardless of warfarin control
(time in therapeutic range) and in patients who needed dose reduction.
3.6 The primary objective of AVERROES was to determine if apixaban was superior to
aspirin for preventing the composite outcome of stroke or systemic embolism in
adults with at least 1 risk factor for stroke in whom vitamin K antagonists were
unsuitable. In the intention-to-treat population apixaban reduced the rate of
stroke and systemic embolism compared with aspirin over a mean follow-up of
1.1 years (HR 0.45, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.62, p<0.001). The rates of disabling or fatal
stroke were also lower in patients who received apixaban compared with patients
who received aspirin (HR 0.43, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.65). When considered as a
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 9 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
separate outcome apixaban reduced the rates of ischaemic stroke compared with
aspirin (HR 0.37, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.55) but did not statistically significantly reduce
the rates of haemorrhagic stroke (HR 0.67, 95% CI 0.24 to 1.88, p=0.45). Apixaban
was associated with a higher rate of all bleeding than aspirin (HR 1.30, 95% CI
1.10 to 1.53) and of major or clinically relevant non-major bleeding (HR 1.38, 95%
CI 1.07 to 1.78). Although apixaban was associated with higher rates of major
bleeding than aspirin, this was not statistically significant (HR 1.54, 95% CI 0.96 to
2.45, p=0.07).
3.7 No head-to-head data were available for apixaban compared with dabigatran
etexilate (hereafter referred to as dabigatran) or rivaroxaban. The manufacturer
used a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo stimulation in WinBUGS to conduct
2 network meta-analyses using a fixed-effect model. The first meta-analysis
included patients for whom vitamin K antagonist treatment was suitable and it
compared apixaban, warfarin, dabigatran and rivaroxaban. The second meta-
analysis was intended to assess a population of patients for whom vitamin K
antagonists were unsuitable, comparing apixaban, dabigatran, rivaroxaban and
aspirin.
3.8 The first meta-analysis included ARISTOTLE, RE-LY and ROCKET-AF trials. RE-LY
compared dabigatran (150 mg and 110 mg twice daily) with warfarin. ROCKET-AF
compared rivaroxaban (20 mg once daily) with warfarin. There were differences
between the trials of apixaban, dabigatran and rivaroxaban: ARISTOTLE and
ROCKET-AF were double-blind, double-dummy trials, whereas RE-LY was an
open-label trial; the population in ROCKET-AF had a higher stroke or systemic
embolism risk at baseline (baseline CHADS of 3.6 [ROCKET-AF],
2
2.1 [ARISTOTLE], 2.1 [RE-LY]) and the mean percentage time in therapeutic range
was lower in ROCKET-AF (55%) than in ARISTOTLE (62%) and RE-LY (64%).
Where possible, the manufacturer used intention-to-treat data from each trial.
However, the manufacturer highlighted that there was an absence of published
intention-to-treat outcome data for some secondary outcomes from ROCKET-AF
including fatal stroke, disabling stroke and non-disabling stroke. Therefore, data
from the on-treatment population were also used. The second meta-analysis
included ARISTOTLE, RE-LY, ROCKET-AF and AVERROES.
3.9 The manufacturer did not present any statistical analysis of heterogeneity but
commented that potential sources of clinical heterogeneity between the trials
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 10 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
were the differences in baseline stroke risk scores, study blinding, and whether
the intention-to-treat or on-treatment populations had been used to assess
efficacy and safety outcomes. Additionally, the manufacturer highlighted a
statistically significant difference in myocardial infarction at baseline between
treatment groups in ROCKET-AF.
3.10 The base-case results of the first meta-analysis indicated that there were no
statistically significant differences between apixaban and rivaroxaban or
dabigatran in the incidence of stroke, systemic embolism and all-cause mortality.
The results did however suggest that apixaban was associated with a
significantly lower incidence of myocardial infarction compared with dabigatran
(150 mg or 110 mg twice daily). Apixaban was associated with a significantly
lower incidence of all bleeding outcomes compared with rivaroxaban (intracranial
haemorrhage, major bleeding, gastrointestinal bleeding, other major bleeding,
clinically relevant non-major bleeding, any bleeding). Apixaban had a significantly
lower incidence of all bleeding events except intracranial haemorrhage and
clinically relevant non-major bleeding (which was not measured in RE-LY) than
dabigatran 150 mg. Apixaban had a significantly lower incidence of any bleeding
than dabigatran 110 mg. In addition, apixaban was associated with significantly
fewer discontinuations compared with dabigatran 150 mg, dabigatran 110 mg and
rivaroxaban. All of the hazard ratios from the first network meta-analysis are
academic-in-confidence. The manufacturer reported that the results for apixaban
compared with warfarin generated by the first meta-analysis were consistent
with the pair-wise comparisons between warfarin and apixaban in ARISTOTLE
(see sections 3.3 and 3.5).
3.11 The manufacturer conducted 2 sensitivity analyses of its first network meta-
analysis. The first used data from a later publication of RE-LY (Connolly et al.
2010) rather than the RE-LY 2009 data. The results for the first sensitivity
analysis were generally consistent with the base case; however, the reduction in
myocardial infarction with apixaban compared with both doses of dabigatran was
no longer statistically significantly different. The second sensitivity analysis used
the safety on-treatment dataset from ROCKET-AF rather than the intention-to-
treat data from this trial, which was also generally consistent with the base case.
The hazard ratios from the sensitivity analysis of the manufacturer's first network
meta-analysis are academic-in-confidence.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 11 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
3.12 The manufacturer commented that there were no data for rivaroxaban or
dabigatran in the population for whom warfarin was unsuitable, so data from
ROCKET-AF (which assessed rivaroxaban compared with warfarin) and RE-LY
(which assessed dabigatran compared with warfarin) were included, alongside
ARISTOTLE and AVERROES. This meant that the second meta-analysis
represented a mix of patients for whom warfarin was suitable and unsuitable
('warfarin-suitable' and '-unsuitable' populations).
3.13 The manufacturer also used data from ARISTOTLE, RE-LY and ROCKET-AF to
estimate the distribution of stroke severity and bleed type associated with
apixaban, warfarin, rivaroxaban and dabigatran. Mild, moderate, severe and fatal
stroke were classified by modified Rankin scores, with scores of 0 to 2 classed as
a mild stroke, scores of 3 to 4 classed as a moderate stroke, a score of 5 classed
as a severe stroke and a score of 6 classed as a fatal stroke. Data corresponding
to these modified Rankin scores were available for apixaban and warfarin from
ARISTOTLE, but ROCKET-AF and RE-LY grouped stroke severity scores
differently. The manufacturer therefore estimated the proportion of patients that
would be expected to have scores of 3 to 4 or 5 in the group of patients reported
as having a stroke with a modified Rankin score of 3 to 5 with rivaroxaban or
dabigatran in ROCKET-AF and RE-LY. The manufacturer based this estimate on
the relative proportions of patients treated with apixaban who had these scores
in ARISTOTLE. The distribution of stroke severity across treatments in the
population for whom a VKA antagonist was suitable is academic-in-confidence.
3.14 The manufacturer constructed a Markov model to evaluate the long- and
medium-term consequences of apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic
embolism in people with atrial fibrillation. The model considered warfarin-suitable
and -unsuitable populations separately. The baseline characteristics of both
populations were considered to be equivalent to the characteristics of a cohort
of patients with a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation from a UK GP-based survey
(Gallagher et al. 2011). Data from both network meta-analyses were used to
inform the clinical effectiveness of treatments in the warfarin-suitable and
-unsuitable populations respectively and to derive the transition probabilities
used in the model. The risk of stroke was adjusted for baseline CHADS score
2
distribution. The risks of stroke, intracranial haemorrhage, myocardial infarction,
other major bleeds and clinically relevant non-major bleeds were adjusted for
age. The model had a lifetime time horizon. The intervention and comparators
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 12 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
were implemented in the model according to their marketing authorisations. For
dabigatran 150 mg it was assumed that patients would switch to the 110 mg dose
when they reached 80 years in line with the marketing authorisation. The average
dosage of warfarin in the warfarin-suitable population was assumed to be 4.5 mg
once daily. The evaluation was undertaken from the perspective of the NHS and
Personal Social Services in England and Wales, and costs and benefits were
discounted at 3.5% per year after the first year.
3.15 The model had 18 health states, including death. Both event-related mortality and
other-cause mortality were incorporated in the model. Hypothetical patients
transitioned between health states in cycles of 6 weeks with only 1 clinical event
permitted per cycle. Patients entered the model in the non-valvular atrial
fibrillation ('NVAF') health state, and stayed in this state until they died or
experienced 1 of the following permanent events: ischaemic stroke (mild,
moderate, severe or fatal); haemorrhagic stroke (mild, moderate, severe or fatal);
systemic embolism or myocardial infarction; or 1 of the following temporary
events: other intracranial haemorrhage (that is not a haemorrhagic stroke); other
major bleeds (gastrointestinal bleeds or other bleeds besides intracranial
haemorrhage and gastrointestinal-related bleeds); clinically relevant non-major
bleeds; or other cardiovascular hospitalisations (that is, cardiovascular
hospitalisations unrelated to stroke or myocardial infarction). The model allowed a
maximum of 2 lines of therapy. After a switch to second-line therapy, patients
transitioned into the 'NVAF without original anticoagulant' health state and were
at risk of the same events as patients in the 'NVAF' health state (with the
exception of the switch to second-line therapy).
3.16 The manufacturer classified the events as permanent or temporary. Patients who
experienced a permanent event accrued both acute and long-term maintenance
costs and were not assumed to recover to their previous level of health. After a
permanent event, patients in the model were not exposed to the risks of all
events: patients who had systemic embolism or myocardial infarction stayed in
those health states until they died; patients who had a non-fatal stroke could
remain in that health state, have 1 recurrent stroke or die. Recurrent strokes were
assumed to be of the same type as the initial event (ischaemic or haemorrhagic)
but could be of different severity. The resource use and disutility associated with
the second stroke was assumed to be equal to that of the most severe stroke
experienced. After a temporary event, all patients were assumed to recover to
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 13 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
their previous health status.
3.17 A switch from first-line to second-line therapy was permitted after
discontinuation because of a clinical event (intracranial haemorrhage or other
major bleed) or after discontinuation because of other causes. Patients could
switch to aspirin or have no treatment. In the base case, anyone who
discontinued treatment was assumed to receive aspirin as second-line treatment.
Only a switch from first-line anticoagulation therapy to second-line therapy with
aspirin altered patients' risk of subsequent clinical events. Patients who
experienced certain permanent events also switched treatment: patients who had
a myocardial infarction or haemorrhagic stroke were assumed to stop treatment,
and patients receiving aspirin as second-line therapy switched to warfarin if they
had an ischaemic stroke or systemic embolism. However, all other patients who
had ischaemic stroke or systemic embolism were assumed to remain on their
original treatment in the base case. The risk of subsequent events for patients
after a permanent event was assumed to be independent of treatment received,
so switching did not affect their risk profile.
3.18 The manufacturer conducted a systematic review of health-state utility value
studies relevant to the health states considered in the model, focusing on studies
that reported EQ-5D values. Values from 21 studies that presented EQ-5D data in
a population with atrial fibrillation and 3 studies that reported EQ-5D values for a
variety of chronic conditions after controlling for comorbidities were included. As
there were some health states for which a utility value had not been identified,
studies of a population with atrial fibrillation that reported utilities elicited by
methods other than the EQ-5D were screened, and data from a further 8 studies
were included. One further study was identified from the reference list from the
submissions for:
• NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate for the
prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation and
• NICE's technology appraisal guidance on rivaroxaban for the prevention of
stroke and systemic embolism in people with atrial fibrillation.
3.19 The manufacturer used unit costs taken from NHS reference costs 2010 to
2011 where possible. If available, Healthcare Resource Group codes specified in
the costing report for atrial fibrillation from NICE's previous guideline on atrial
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 14 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
fibrillation (now replaced by NICE's guideline on atrial fibrillation) were used. The
average daily drug acquisition costs were £2.20 for apixaban, £2.20 for
dabigatran (either dose), £2.10 for rivaroxaban and £0.12 for warfarin (4.5 mg
average daily dose). The manufacturer's model included intervention costs such
as an annual INR monitoring cost of £248, which was an inflated estimate of the
ERG's calculation in NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran
etexilate, and a £3 renal monitoring cost for 19.4% of patients treated with
dabigatran. The manufacturer used NHS reference costs for acute costs per
episode for the temporary health states. The acute and long-term costs for
systemic embolism and stroke were taken from a UK population-based
assessment. Dyspepsia was the only adverse event that was not explicitly
modelled as a health state, and a yearly cost of £27.60 was applied to all patients
who had dyspepsia.
3.20 The manufacturer presented a deterministic base case for the warfarin-suitable
and -unsuitable populations. In the population for whom warfarin was suitable,
the ICER for apixaban compared with warfarin was £11,008 per QALY gained. This
represented a gain of 0.164 QALYs for an incremental cost of £1,795. Dabigatran
110 mg twice daily was strictly dominated (was more costly and less effective)
than the dabigatran blend (dabigatran used as per its marketing authorisation,
that is, people who are younger than 80 years receive a 150 mg twice daily dose
and people 80 years or older receive a 110 mg twice daily dose). Apixaban
extendedly dominated rivaroxaban and the dabigatran blend (resulted in a lower
ICER compared with warfarin despite having higher total QALYs and total costs
than rivaroxaban and the dabigatran blend).
3.21 Although aspirin was not included as a comparator in the scope, the
manufacturer compared apixaban with aspirin in a population for whom warfarin
was unsuitable. In this population apixaban was associated with an ICER of
£2,903 per QALY gained compared with aspirin.
3.22 The manufacturer assessed the univariate sensitivity of the model to
117 parameters using deterministic sensitivity analyses. In the warfarin-suitable
population, parameters that had the most influential effect on the ICER for
apixaban compared with warfarin were disutility associated with warfarin use, the
hazard ratios for intracranial haemorrhage, ischaemic stroke or other-cause
mortality during the trial, the cost of INR monitoring visit and the discount rate
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 15 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
applied to QALYs. For apixaban compared with rivaroxaban or dabigatran, the
most influential parameters were the hazard ratios associated with stroke,
intracranial haemorrhage and other-cause mortality during the trial for these
comparators compared with apixaban, the absolute stroke risk for apixaban, and
the second-line stroke risk for aspirin. All of the ICERs calculated in the
manufacturer's deterministic sensitivity analysis for apixaban compared with the
comparator drugs were below £20,000 per QALY gained. In addition, the
manufacturer carried out 19 scenario analyses. The majority of the scenario
analyses decreased the base-case ICER (for apixaban compared with
comparator). The probabilistic sensitivity analysis indicated that the probability
that apixaban was cost effective at £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY gained was
80% and 87% respectively. For the dabigatran blend, rivaroxaban and warfarin
the probabilities of being cost effective at £20,000 were 10%, 9% and 1%
respectively. At £30,000 these were 5%, 7% and 0% respectively.
3.23 The ERG considered that, of the 2 trials of apixaban, only ARISTOTLE met the
inclusion criteria for this technology appraisal, although it did acknowledge that
aspirin is sometimes used in clinical practice in the UK. With respect to the
network meta-analyses, the ERG did not consider the second analysis to be
appropriate to determine the relative effectiveness of aspirin, apixaban,
rivaroxaban and dabigatran in a population for whom vitamin K antagonists were
unsuitable because the majority of trials in the second network meta-analysis
included patients for whom warfarin was suitable. The ERG therefore focused its
critique on the ARISTOTLE trial and the first network meta-analysis which
compared the safety and efficacy of apixaban with warfarin, rivaroxaban and
dabigatran.
3.24 The ERG considered that the inclusion and exclusion criteria, follow-up and
statistical analysis of ARISTOTLE were acceptable and that the baseline
characteristics of the randomised populations were well balanced between trial
arms. The ERG commented that, based on advice given by clinicians on the time
in therapeutic range expected in a UK population, the mean time in therapeutic
range in ARISTOTLE (62.2%) was acceptable. It also considered the INR
monitoring in ARISTOTLE to be consistent with that which would occur routinely
in the UK. The ERG additionally considered that the distribution of CHADS scores
2
in ARISTOTLE was comparable to the UK population. However, the ERG
highlighted that no data on transient ischaemic attack or health-related quality of
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 16 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
life were collected in ARISTOTLE or AVERROES, and that the effectiveness of
apixaban in reducing transient ischaemic attacks and improving health-related
quality of life was therefore unclear.
3.25 The ERG noted that the results of the manufacturer's base case were generated
deterministically rather than probabilistically. Therefore, the ERG used the
manufacturer's probabilistic sensitivity analysis to estimate the manufacturer's
probabilistic base case. The ICER for apixaban compared with warfarin in the
probabilistic base case was £16,852 per QALY gained. The ERG considered that
the manufacturer had presented a robust and predominantly conservative
(direction of bias more likely to be against rather than towards apixaban)
economic evaluation of apixaban compared with warfarin, dabigatran 110 mg,
dabigatran blend and rivaroxaban in the warfarin suitable population. However,
the ERG commented on the plausibility of some of the assumptions and inputs
used in the manufacturer's model. The ERG considered whether certain
outcomes would be expected to be dependent on the treatment a person
received. It noted that severity of stroke event and bleed type was assumed to
be dependent on the treatment received. The ERG considered that this may not
be clinically appropriate and that there may be limitations to the data that
informed these assumptions. The ERG also noted that the within-trial rate of
other-cause mortality was different for patients treated with warfarin than
apixaban, dabigatran or rivaroxaban. Although patients treated with warfarin may
be at a higher risk of event-specific death, the ERG did not expect that they
would be at a different risk of other-cause mortality.
3.26 The ERG noted that patients who had a stroke (haemorrhagic or ischaemic),
systemic embolism or myocardial infarction were assumed to be at risk of fewer
types of subsequent clinical events than patients in other health states. The ERG
accepted the risk limitation applied to patients who experienced a stroke but that
patients with systemic embolism or myocardial infarction would remain at risk of
further events (in particular ischaemic stroke). The ERG considered that some
people who stop therapy with apixaban, dabigatran or rivaroxaban may be
eligible for treatment with warfarin or a different oral anticoagulant rather than
aspirin which was the second-line treatment in the manufacturer's model. The
ERG additionally commented that the risk profile of people on second-line
therapy was not adjusted for characteristics such as age or CHADS score in the
2
manufacturer's model, but it accepted that adjusting for characteristics in
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 17 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
second-line treatment may be beyond the reasonable scope of a Markov model.
3.27 The ERG commented that utilities were not age adjusted in the manufacturer's
model, meaning that a person's quality of life would be affected by events
experienced but not by increasing age. The ERG considered that the assumption
of equivalent disutility between the apixaban, rivaroxaban and dabigatran may
not be robust but that any resultant bias was likely to be against apixaban.
3.28 The ERG noted that the acute cost of systemic embolism in the manufacturer's
model (£4,077.98) was approximately double the acute costs used in the
submissions for NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate
(dabigatran £2,772 [fatal and non-fatal acute costs]) and NICE's technology
appraisal guidance on rivaroxaban (rivaroxaban £1,658). These submissions had
used NHS reference costs.
3.29 For its revised base case the ERG changed some of the assumptions used in the
manufacturer's model. The ERG assumed that other-cause mortality, stroke
severity and bleed type were independent of the type of anticoagulant treatment
received. The ERG adjusted utility for increasing age by -0.00029 per year. The
ERG assumed that people who had myocardial infarction or systemic embolism
were at risk of recurrent stroke, and used the same acute costs for systemic
embolism as in NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate, as
this was the most conservative cost used in the submissions for NICE's
technology appraisal guidance on rivaroxaban and NICE's technology appraisal
guidance on dabigatran etexilate. The ERG also assumed the time horizon was
26 years.
3.30 The ERG noted that after these amendments, dabigatran 110 mg continued to be
strictly dominated by the dabigatran blend and rivaroxaban and the dabigatran
blend remained extendedly dominated by apixaban. The ICER for apixaban
compared with warfarin for each individual amendment was relatively consistent
with the manufacturer's base-case ICER. The ERG noted that assuming stroke
severity was independent of treatment increased the ICER of apixaban compared
with warfarin to £12,277 per QALY gained, whereas assuming bleed type was
independent of treatment decreased this ICER to £9,771 per QALY gained. When
all of the amendments were combined to form the ERG's revised base case, this
resulted in an ICER for apixaban compared with warfarin of £12,757 per QALY
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 18 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
gained. This represented an incremental cost of £1,823 compared with warfarin
for an additional 0.14 QALY.
3.31 The ERG carried out 3 further exploratory analyses that were not included in its
revised base case. These were:
• Age adjustment of event risks for people on second-line therapy, using the
same risk adjustment factors as for people receiving first-line therapy.
Dabigatran blend and rivaroxaban continued to be extendedly dominated by
apixaban. The ICER for apixaban compared with warfarin fell slightly from the
manufacturer's base case of £11,008 to £10,779 per QALY gained.
• Removal of treatment-related disutility. Dabigatran blend and rivaroxaban
continued to be extendedly dominated by apixaban but the ICER for apixaban
compared with warfarin increased from £11,008 to £14,530 per QALY gained.
• Changes to the treatment sequence to allow second-line treatment with
warfarin, apixaban, rivaroxaban or dabigatran. The results of these analyses
were highly variable, with ICERs for apixaban varying between £287 per
QALY gained (compared with warfarin when dabigatran 110 mg was the
second-line treatment) and £60,366 per QALY gained (compared with
dabigatran blend when rivaroxaban was the second-line treatment).
However, the ERG commented that the results of this analysis should be
interpreted with caution because the main driver of the ICERs was
discontinuation rates associated with first-line therapy and, consequently,
treatments with higher discontinuation rates such as dabigatran appeared
more effective than in the manufacturer's base case.
3.32 Full details of all the evidence are in the manufacturer's submission and the ERG
report.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 19 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of apixaban, having considered evidence on the nature of non-
valvular atrial fibrillation and the value placed on the benefits of apixaban by
people with the condition, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It
also took into account the effective use of NHS resources.
4.2 The Committee heard from clinical specialists and patient experts that the
current standard treatment for people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation who
need anticoagulation is warfarin or the newer oral anticoagulants rivaroxaban or
dabigatran. The clinical specialists explained that the majority of people receiving
an anticoagulant currently receive warfarin. In addition, some people who meet
criteria for anticoagulation are currently receiving the antiplatelet agent aspirin
inappropriately because of clinical reluctance to prescribe warfarin. The
Committee heard that warfarin is an effective treatment but that it is associated
with a number of problems. The patient experts explained that repeated INR
monitoring tests with warfarin can cause pain and scarring and limit a person's
choice of leisure or other activities and that warfarin can have a greater impact
on a person's quality of life than atrial fibrillation itself. They also highlighted that
warfarin has multiple interactions with food, alcohol and drugs that can cause
further inconvenience that make adherence to treatment difficult. Overall, the
patient experts considered that making the day-to-day choices about lifestyle
needed in order to take and monitor warfarin appropriately has a substantial
impact on a person's quality of life. The Committee accepted the limitations of
warfarin therapy and the considerable effect it may have on the people who take
it, and recognised the potential benefits of apixaban for people with atrial
fibrillation.
4.3 The Committee considered the clinical-effectiveness data from the ARISTOTLE
trial comparing apixaban with warfarin. It considered that the ARISTOTLE trial
was of good quality and it discussed whether the results were generalisable to
people diagnosed with atrial fibrillation in the NHS. The Committee noted that the
mean time in therapeutic range for those in the warfarin arm was 62.2% (the
median was 66%) and asked the clinical specialists whether this was
representative of what would be achieved in clinical practice in the UK. The
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 20 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
clinical specialists explained that there is variation in time in therapeutic range
achieved between centres. One clinical specialist quoted a benchmarking study
using a computerised dose adjustment system in which a mean time in
therapeutic range of over 70% was achieved. Another clinical specialist stated
that the time in therapeutic range observed in ARISTOTLE reflected what is
generally seen in the UK, not what is observed in centres achieving the best time
in therapeutic range, and that centres should aim for a time in therapeutic range
for each individual of 70% and above. One clinical specialist also highlighted that
in their experience people treated for atrial fibrillation tended to be older and
more likely to be on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), which can
impact on bleeding complications, than the ARISTOTLE population. The
Committee noted the potential differences between the trial population and
people treated for atrial fibrillation in the UK but concluded that the
characteristics of the people who participated in ARISTOTLE were broadly
generalisable to the UK population.
4.4 The Committee considered the results of the ARISTOTLE trial. It noted that
apixaban was more effective than warfarin in reducing the primary efficacy
outcome of all stroke (ischaemic and haemorrhagic), and systemic embolism. The
Committee noted that the primary efficacy outcome was a composite of the
effectiveness outcomes (ischaemic stroke and systemic embolism) and a
bleeding outcome (haemorrhagic stroke). The Committee heard from the clinical
specialists that there is debate about the primary outcomes to use in trials of
anticoagulants for atrial fibrillation, but that it is common to use composite
outcomes, such as the primary efficacy outcome in ARISTOTLE. The Committee
considered the individual components of the composite outcome. It heard from
the clinical specialists that once an embolus leaves the heart it is a matter of
chance whether it flows to the brain, resulting in ischaemic stroke, or to the rest
of the body, causing systemic embolism. The proportion of each was therefore
not a treatment effect. The Committee also heard from the clinical specialists that
a particular benefit conferred by the new anticoagulants compared with warfarin
was the reduction in haemorrhagic strokes. This was also shown in the
ARISTOTLE trial, in which there was a statistically significant reduction in
haemorrhagic stroke with apixaban compared with warfarin, whereas for the
other individual components of the composite end points (ischaemic stroke and
systemic embolism) there was no statistically significant difference. The
Committee concluded that apixaban was more clinically effective than warfarin
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 21 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
for the primary efficacy outcome of reducing stroke and systemic embolism.
4.5 The Committee considered the results of the manufacturer's subgroup analyses
from ARISTOTLE. It noted that the subgroup analysis by CHADS score comprised
2
3 groups: people with a CHADS score of 1 or less, people with a CHADS score of
2 2
2 and people with a CHADS score of 3 or over. The Committee was aware that
2
the ERG had concerns that because people with CHADS scores of 3 to 6 had
2
been grouped together, it was not possible to comment on potential variation in
treatment effect for these subgroups. The Committee concluded that there was
no biologically plausible reason to indicate that the relative treatment effect
would be dependent on baseline risk and that the mean CHADS score of 2.1 in
2
the trial was a reasonable reflection of the UK population currently on
anticoagulant therapy.
4.6 The Committee noted that the manufacturer presented data for subgroups based
on INR control using quartiles of centre time in therapeutic range. It further noted
that there was a numerically lower rate of stroke or systemic embolism with
apixaban compared with warfarin in all analyses broken down by centre time in
therapeutic range, but that ARISTOTLE was not statistically powered to
demonstrate superiority across subgroups. The Committee concluded that the
evidence from subgroups based on centre time in therapeutic range was not
sufficiently robust to use to formulate guidance based on an individual's time in
therapeutic range.
4.7 The Committee considered the adverse events reported in ARISTOTLE. The
Committee noted that for the primary safety outcome of major bleeding (using
the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis definition), treatment
with apixaban resulted in fewer bleeding events than warfarin, including a
reduced rate of intracranial bleeding. The Committee recognised that this has a
high mortality rate and a large impact on a person's quality of life, and is the most
feared bleeding outcome for people taking any type of anticoagulant. The
Committee noted however that there were no statistically significant differences
in the rates of gastrointestinal bleeding between apixaban and warfarin. The
Committee concluded that apixaban resulted in fewer bleeds than warfarin and it
recognised the particular importance of the effects of apixaban in reducing the
risk of intracranial bleeding for people with atrial fibrillation when compared with
warfarin.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 22 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
4.8 The Committee noted that all anticoagulants are associated with a risk of
bleeding and discussed the management of atrial fibrillation in people who
experience a bleed while taking warfarin or apixaban. The Committee heard from
the clinical specialists that people taking warfarin who experience a bleed may be
given vitamin K to reverse the effects of warfarin. However, there are no standard
treatments to reverse the effects of apixaban (or the other newer oral
anticoagulants rivaroxaban and dabigatran) and that this is an area of ongoing
research. Current clinical opinion is that the newer oral anticoagulants have
moderate half-lives and that people who have bleeds while taking these drugs
should stop treatment. The Committee also heard from the patient experts and
the clinical specialists that reversing the effect of warfarin with vitamin K may
take several hours, but that there are other approaches, such as using a
prothrombin concentrate, that are fast-acting. The Committee concluded that
there is a standard approach to reverse significant bleeding for a person taking
warfarin, but that there is uncertainty about the most effective way to stop active
bleeding when a person is taking apixaban.
4.9 The Committee noted that the manufacturer had included evidence on the
efficacy of apixaban compared with aspirin for people for whom vitamin K
antagonist treatment was unsuitable, but that this was not part of the scope
issued by NICE. The Committee understood that the manufacturer's rationale for
including aspirin as an additional comparator reflected the recommendation in
NICE's previous guideline on atrial fibrillation (now replaced by NICE's guideline
on atrial fibrillation) that people who need anticoagulation but for whom warfarin
is unsuitable should be offered aspirin. The Committee was also aware that
aspirin had not been included as a comparator in the apixaban scope because,
since the publication of NICE's guideline 36 on atrial fibrillation, dabigatran and
rivaroxaban had been recommended for use by NICE and these were now
alternative treatments to warfarin. The Committee heard from the clinical
specialists that aspirin is a less effective treatment than the anticoagulants but is
still being prescribed for some people with atrial fibrillation despite publication of
NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate and rivaroxaban.
The Committee further heard that although AVERROES was a useful trial, the
population for whom warfarin was unsuitable was very mixed, including people
for whom warfarin was clinically unsuitable and those who were unwilling to take
it. The Committee noted that the ERG did not consider that AVERROES met the
inclusion criteria for this appraisal and had focused its critique on ARISTOTLE.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 23 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
The Committee agreed that the comparators defined in the final scope were
appropriate and that the key trial for this appraisal was ARISTOTLE. However, it
noted with interest that the evidence presented in AVERROES showed that
apixaban was associated with a reduced rate of stroke or systemic embolism
compared with aspirin and an increased rate of bleeding events overall, but not
an increased rate of major bleeds.
4.10 The Committee discussed the indirect clinical-effectiveness evidence for
apixaban compared with dabigatran (both the 110 mg twice daily dose and
150 mg twice daily dose) and rivaroxaban. The Committee noted that the
manufacturer presented 2 network meta-analyses for vitamin K antagonist-
suitable and -unsuitable populations (which included aspirin) respectively. The
Committee noted that the ERG considered the second meta-analysis to be
flawed as there were no specific data available for rivaroxaban or dabigatran for a
warfarin-unsuitable population and the network meta-analysis included a mixed
population including people for whom warfarin was suitable and unsuitable. The
Committee considered that only the first network meta-analysis, relating to the
warfarin-suitable population, was appropriate to the decision problem. The
Committee noted that the population in the study comparing rivaroxaban with
warfarin (ROCKET-AF) had a higher mean baseline CHADS score than the
2
population in the study comparing dabigatran with warfarin (RE-LY) or
ARISTOTLE. The Committee additionally noted that the mean time in therapeutic
range in the warfarin arm was lower in ROCKET-AF than in RE-LY or ARISTOTLE.
The Committee considered that the differences in baseline characteristics
between the study populations meant that there was uncertainty surrounding the
results of the network meta-analysis. The Committee noted that the network
meta-analysis did not detect any difference between apixaban, rivaroxaban and
dabigatran in the rate of stroke or systemic embolism; showed a lower rate of all
bleeding outcomes with apixaban compared with rivaroxaban and of all bleeding
outcomes except intracranial haemorrhage and clinically relevant non-major
bleeding (which was not measured in RE-LY) compared with dabigatran 150 mg;
a lower rate of 'any bleeding' compared with dabigatran 110 mg; and a lower rate
of myocardial infarction with apixaban compared with dabigatran (both doses).
The Committee noted that the network meta-analysis had shown broadly similar
outcomes and some differences between apixaban, rivaroxaban and dabigatran,
but because of differences in the trial populations the results of the network
meta-analysis should be viewed with caution. It also noted that some of the
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 24 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
criteria in the network meta-analysis were in fact not a direct treatment effect,
such as the proportion of ischaemic stroke compared with systemic embolism,
and evidence was lacking that the severity of an ischaemic or haemorrhagic
stroke was treatment specific for the new agents. The Committee concluded that
the network meta-analysis results should be interpreted in the light of these
uncertainties and were not sufficiently robust to reliably differentiate between
apixaban, rivaroxaban and dabigatran.
4.11 The Committee considered the manufacturer's economic model and the
exploratory analyses performed by the ERG. It agreed with the ERG that the
general modelling approach was reasonable and consistent with other analyses
of atrial fibrillation treatments. The Committee noted the discussion on the
proportion of ischaemic stroke compared with systemic embolism being
unrelated to the treatment (see section 4.4). It also questioned whether the
severity of an ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke was treatment specific (see
section 3.13). In a previous appraisal the Committee had heard from experts that
it was plausible and that there is evidence that strokes on warfarin were likely to
be more severe than on dabigatran, but the clinical specialists for the appraisal of
apixaban did not put forward any evidence that this had been substantiated and
were of the opinion that at least for the newer agents, there was no biologically
plausible reason or evidence that the severity of strokes would differ between
apixaban, rivaroxaban and dabigatran. The Committee concluded that although
the general modelling approach was appropriate, weaknesses included the
assumption that whether a person experienced an ischaemic stroke or systemic
embolism was treatment related, and that there is currently insufficient evidence
to support the assumption in the model that the severity of an ischaemic or
haemorrhagic stroke was dependent on the specific anticoagulant agent they
had received.
4.12 The Committee considered the utility values used in the model. The Committee
noted that ARISTOTLE had not assessed health-related quality of life and that the
utility values used in the manufacturer's model were identified through a
systematic review. The Committee questioned whether the manufacturer's
assumption of a permanent utility decrement following a myocardial infarction
was appropriate. However, it accepted the views of the clinical specialists that
disutility following a myocardial infarction would not be expected to change
substantially after 6 months. The Committee concluded that the utilities used in
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 25 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
the model were appropriate.
4.13 The Committee considered the costs used in the model. It noted that the
estimates for stroke and systemic embolism were based on a cohort study of a
population living in the Oxford area of the UK and that the costs for ischaemic
stroke were lower than those for haemorrhagic stroke. The Committee
questioned whether the study had been able to estimate haemorrhagic stroke
costs accurately given the lower incidence of this event than ischaemic stroke in
the population, and whether the higher haemorrhagic stroke costs assumed in
the model could have driven the cost-effectiveness results. The Committee heard
from the ERG that the haemorrhagic stroke costs were consistent with those
used in NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate and
rivaroxaban and that, as a small proportion of people had a haemorrhagic stroke
in the model, other factors such as discontinuation rates drove the cost-
effectiveness results to a greater extent than the cost of haemorrhagic stroke.
The Committee also noted that an INR monitoring cost of £248 was assumed by
the manufacturer, and that this was consistent with the monitoring costs used in
NICE's technology appraisal guidance on dabigatran etexilate (and was updated
for inflation). The Committee concluded that the costs used in the model were
appropriate.
4.14 The Committee considered the results of the economic model. It noted that the
manufacturer's base-case deterministic and probabilistic ICERs for apixaban
compared with warfarin were £11,000 and £16,900 per QALY gained respectively,
and that the ERG's revised deterministic base case, (see section 3.30) resulted in
an ICER of £12,800 per QALY gained. The Committee noted that only one of the
sensitivity analyses performed by the ERG (in which alternative second-line
treatments rather than aspirin were considered, see section 3.31) influenced the
results substantially. The Committee accepted the ERG's comment that this
analysis should be interpreted with caution because the main driver of the ICER
was discontinuation rates on first-line treatment. The Committee noted that the
ERG's sensitivity analysis assuming stroke severity was independent of treatment
had a modest effect on the ICER compared with warfarin (the ICER increased to
£12,300 per QALY gained when stroke severity was assumed to be the same for
all of the anticoagulants). The Committee concluded that apixaban had been
shown to be cost effective compared with warfarin, the most plausible ICER
being less than £20,000 per QALY gained, and could be recommended as an
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 26 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
option for preventing stroke and systemic embolism for people with non-valvular
atrial fibrillation who have 1 or more risk factors for stroke.
4.15 The Committee noted that in the manufacturer's model dabigatran and
rivaroxaban had higher ICERs compared with warfarin than the ICER for apixaban
compared with warfarin. In addition, in the incremental analysis dabigatran
110 mg twice daily was dominated by the dabigatran blend and the dabigatran
blend and rivaroxaban were extendedly dominated by apixaban. However, the
Committee was concerned that there was considerable uncertainty about the
relative treatment effects and cost effectiveness of apixaban, rivaroxaban and
dabigatran arising from differences in the baseline characteristics of the people
included in the trials and the relative treatment effects attributed to the individual
anticoagulants that informed the network meta-analysis. The Committee
concluded that there was insufficient evidence to distinguish between the cost
effectiveness of apixaban, dabigatran and rivaroxaban at this time.
4.16 Finally, the Committee concluded that the decision about whether to start
treatment with apixaban should be made after an informed discussion between
the clinician and the person about the risks and benefits of apixaban compared
with warfarin, dabigatran and rivaroxaban. For people who are taking warfarin,
the potential risks and benefits of switching to apixaban should be considered in
light of their level of INR control.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 27 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning groups, NHS England and, with
respect to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this appraisal within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final appraisal document.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has non-valvular atrial fibrillation and the healthcare professional
responsible for their care thinks that apixaban is the right treatment, it should be
available for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 28 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
6 Recommendations for further research
6.1 During this appraisal it was noted that there is a need for additional research on
the management of bleeds that occur while people are receiving apixaban,
rivaroxaban or dabigatran etexilate, as there are no antidotes or established
treatments to stop active bleeding for these agents.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 29 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
7 Appraisal Committee members, and
NICE project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. Members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. There are 4 Appraisal Committees, each with
a chair and vice chair. Each Appraisal Committee meets once a month, except in
December when there are no meetings. Each Committee considers its own list of
technologies, and ongoing topics are not moved between Committees.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Dr Jane Adam (Chair)
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, St George's Hospital
Professor Iain Squire (Vice Chair)
Consultant Physician, University Hospitals of Leicester
Professor A E Ades
Professor of Public Health Science, Department of Community Based Medicine, University
of Bristol
Dr Jeremy Braybrooke
Consultant Medical Oncologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Gerardine Bryant
General Practitioner, Heartwood Medical Centre, Derbyshire
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 30 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
Mr Andrew England
Lecturer in Medical Imaging, NIHR Fellow, University of Liverpool
Professor Jonathan Grigg
Professor of Paediatric Respiratory and Environmental Medicine, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University London
Dr Brian Hawkins
Chief Pharmacist, Cwm Taf Health Board, South Wales
Dr Peter Heywood
Consultant Neurologist, Frenchay Hospital
Dr Sharon Saint Lamont
Head of Quality and Innovation, North East Strategic Health Authority
Dr Ian Lewin
Consultant Endocrinologist, North Devon District Hospital
Dr Louise Longworth
Reader in Health Economics, HERG, Brunel University
Dr Anne McCune
Consultant Hepatologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Alec Miners
Lecturer in Health Economics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Ms Sarah Parry
CNS Paediatric Pain Management, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children
Ms Pamela Rees
Lay Member
Dr Ann Richardson
Lay Member
Dr Paul Robinson
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 31 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
Medical Director, Merck Sharp & Dohme
Ms Ellen Rule
Programme Director, NHS Bristol
Dr Peter Sims
General Practitioner, Devon
Mr David Thomson
Lay Member
Dr John Watkins
Clinical Senior Lecturer and Consultant in Public Health Medicine, Cardiff University and
National Public Health Service Wales
Dr Olivia Wu
Reader in Health Economics, University of Glasgow
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
Mary Hughes
Technical Lead
Zoe Charles
Technical Adviser
Bijal Joshi
Project Manager
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 31 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 32 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
8 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The Evidence Review Group (ERG) report for this appraisal was prepared by BMJ
Technology Assessment Group (BMJ-TAG):
• Edwards SJ, Hamilton V, Trevor N et al. Apixaban for the prevention of stroke and
systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation: A Single Technology
Appraisal. BMJ-TAG, 2012.
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal as
consultees and commentators. They were invited to comment on the draft scope.
Manufacturers or sponsors were also invited to make written submissions. Professional or
specialist, and patient or carer groups gave their expert views on apixaban by providing a
written statement to the Committee. Manufacturers or sponsors, professional or specialist,
patient or carer groups, and other consultees, have the opportunity to appeal against the
final appraisal determination.
Manufacturers or sponsors:
• Bristol–Myers Squibb and Pfizer (apixaban)
Professional or specialist, and patient or carer groups:
• AntiCoagulation Europe (ACE)
• Anticoagulation Specialist Association (ASA)
• Arrhythmia Alliance (AFA Affiliated)
• Association of British Neurologists
• Atrial Fibrillation Association (AFA)
• British Association of Stroke Physicians
• British Heart Foundation
• British Society for Haematology
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 32 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 33 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
• Clinical Leaders of Thrombosis (CLOT)
• Heart Rhythm UK
• Royal College of Nursing
• Royal College of Pathologists
• Royal College of Physicians
• United Kingdom Clinical Pharmacy Association
Other consultees:
• Berkshire PCT Cluster
• Department of Health
• Welsh Government
Commentator organisations (did not provide written evidence and without the right of
appeal):
• Bayer (rivaroxaban)
• BMJ – TAG
• Boehringer Ingelheim (dabigatran etexilate)
• Commissioning Support Appraisals Service
• Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety for Northern Ireland
• Healthcare Improvement Scotland
• MRC Clinical Trials Unit
• National Clinical Guidelines Centre
• National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment Programme
The following individuals were selected from clinical specialist and patient expert
nominations from the consultees and commentators. They gave their expert personal view
on apixaban by providing oral evidence to the Committee.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 33 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 34 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
• Professor Gregory YH Lip, Consultant Cardiologist and Professor of Cardiovascular
Medicine, nominated by Bristol–Myers Squibb and Pfizer – clinical specialist
• Dr Francis Murgatroyd, Director of Cardiac Electrophysiology, nominated by Heart
Rhythm UK – clinical specialist
• Dr Eric Watts, Hon Consulting Haematologist, nominated by the Royal College of
Pathologists and the British Society for Haematology – clinical specialist
• Mrs Jo Jerrome, Assistant Director, nominated by Atrial Fibrillation Association (AFA) –
patient expert
• Mrs Diane Eaton, Project Development Manager, nominated by AntiCoagulation Europe
(ACE) – patient expert
Representatives from the following manufacturer or sponsor attended Committee
meetings. They contributed only when asked by the Committee chair to clarify specific
issues and comment on factual accuracy.
• Bristol–Myers Squibb and Pfizer
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 34 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
--- Страница 35 ---
Apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA275)
Update information
July 2021: Recommendation 1.2 updated to include the other anticoagulants approved by
NICE.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-0045-9
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 35 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 35
