=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "bioresorbable-stent-implantation-to-treat-coronary-artery-disease-pdf-1899876216532165.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:05.915530",
  "file_size_bytes": 61931,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/bioresorbable-stent-implantation-to-treat-coronary-artery-disease-pdf-1899876216532165.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Bioresorbable stent implantation
to treat coronary artery disease
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 3 August 2022
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg732
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 2 ---
Bioresorbable stent implantation to treat coronary artery disease (IPG732)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG492.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Evidence on the efficacy of bioresorbable stent implantation to treat coronary
artery disease is inadequate. Evidence on its safety has shown an increased risk
of serious complications in the longer term. This includes an increased risk of
myocardial infarction and death with some types of bioresorbable stents.
Therefore, this procedure should only be used in the context of research. Find out
what only in research means on the NICE interventional procedures guidance
page.
1.2 Clinicians should enter details about everyone having bioresorbable stent
implantation to treat coronary artery disease into the National Institute for
Cardiovascular Outcomes Research's National Audit of Percutaneous Coronary
Interventions. Contact nicor.auditenquiries@nhs.net for details.
1.3 Further research should include randomised controlled trials reporting details of
patient selection and choice of bioresorbable stent. It should also include long-
term outcomes.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 3 ---
Bioresorbable stent implantation to treat coronary artery disease (IPG732)
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Stenosis of the coronary arteries is usually caused by deposition of
atherosclerotic plaque. This reduces blood flow to the heart muscle and is usually
progressive. Symptoms of coronary artery disease typically include angina (chest
pain that is exacerbated by exertion). A critical reduction of the blood supply to
the heart may result in myocardial infarction or death.
Current treatments
2.2 The symptoms from a stenosed artery may be treated medically. This includes
modifying risk factors (for example, smoking, hyperlipidaemia, obesity,
hyperglycaemia) and treatment with medicines (for example, beta blockers,
nitrates, calcium-channel blockers, antiplatelet agents, statins).
2.3 If medical management fails or is inappropriate, the usual options are coronary
artery bypass grafting, or percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
followed by stent insertion to maintain the patency of the coronary artery.
The procedure
2.4 Bioresorbable stents are designed to be absorbed by the body over time. One
aim is to reduce the risk of late complications such as thrombosis, which may
happen after using metal stents. The other is to reduce the need for long-term
antiplatelet medicines, with their risk of bleeding complications.
2.5 The procedure is done under local anaesthesia. A guidewire is passed into the
target coronary artery, usually from the radial or femoral artery under
fluoroscopic image guidance. A balloon angioplasty catheter passed over the
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 4 ---
Bioresorbable stent implantation to treat coronary artery disease (IPG732)
guidewire is used to dilate the coronary artery stenosis. A bioresorbable stent
mounted on a balloon catheter is passed over the guide wire into the relevant
segment of the artery. Then, it is expanded by inflation of the balloon inside it.
The balloon is then deflated and removed with the guide wire. The stent acts as a
scaffold to hold the vessel open. Additional imaging, such as intravascular
ultrasound and optical coherence tomography, is sometimes used to guide the
procedure. This is to optimise positioning and deployment of the stent in the
target coronary artery.
2.6 Bioresorbable stents are absorbed over time. Most bioresorbable stents are also
drug-eluting, with a view to reducing the risk of restenosis. Antiplatelet medicines
such as aspirin and clopidogrel are usually prescribed for at least 6 months after
the procedure.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 13 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included 1 health technology assessment, 2 randomised controlled
trials, 3 systematic reviews with meta-analysis, 5 case series and 2 case reports.
It is presented in the summary of key evidence section in the interventional
procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: reduced coronary insufficiency symptoms, maintenance of
coronary patency, a reduced myocardial infarction rate and reduced mortality.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: death, myocardial infarction, in-stent thrombosis and need for further
intervention.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 5 ---
Bioresorbable stent implantation to treat coronary artery disease (IPG732)
Committee comments
3.5 The committee noted that most of the evidence came from a single device, which
has now been withdrawn from the market. This device was associated with an
increased risk of complications in the longer term, including myocardial infarction
and death.
3.6 The committee was informed that:
• the rate of stent bioresorption varies between people who have had a stent
implanted and also between different types of device
• there are new generation devices being developed.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-4686-0
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
