=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "cardiac-contractility-modulation-device-implantation-for-heart-failure-pdf-1899874165721029.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:51:18.049781",
  "file_size_bytes": 59231,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/cardiac-contractility-modulation-device-implantation-for-heart-failure-pdf-1899874165721029.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Cardiac contractility modulation
device implantation for heart
failure
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 26 June 2019
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg655
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 2 ---
Cardiac contractility modulation device implantation for heart failure (IPG655)
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 The evidence on cardiac contractility modulation device implantation for
heart failure raises no major safety concerns. However, the evidence on
efficacy is inadequate in quantity and quality. Therefore, this procedure
should only be used in the context of research. Find out what only in
research means on the NICE interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 Further research should ideally be in the form of randomised controlled
trials. These should report details of patient selection, duration and
timing of stimulation, and duration of effect of stimulation. Outcomes
should include ejection fraction, oxygen consumption, New York Heart
Association classification and patient-reported outcomes, including
quality of life.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Heart failure is a complex clinical syndrome of symptoms and signs that
happen when the heart is not working well enough, leading to reduced
blood flow to body tissues. It can lead to oedema in the lungs (causing
breathlessness) and swelling of the legs. Other symptoms include
reduced ability to exercise, fatigue and malaise. Heart failure can be
caused by structural or functional abnormalities of the heart.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 3 ---
Cardiac contractility modulation device implantation for heart failure (IPG655)
Current treatments
2.2 NICE's guideline describes the diagnosis and management of chronic
heart failure in adults. Treatments for heart failure include drugs to
improve heart function, cardiac rehabilitation, cardiac resynchronisation
therapy and cardiac transplantation. Cardiac contractility modulation
device implantation may be an option for people with advanced heart
failure that hasn't responded to conventional therapy.
The procedure
2.3 Cardiac contractility modulation device implantation for heart failure is
usually done under local anaesthesia. A device similar to a pacemaker is
implanted in the right or left pectoral region and is connected to
2 standard pacemaker leads that are threaded through veins into the
right ventricle. The electrodes in the right ventricle are placed on the
ventricular septum at least 2 cm apart. These sense ventricular activity
and deliver cardiac contractility modulation signals. An optional
additional lead may be used to sense atrial activity (usually placed in the
right atrial appendage). In contrast to a pacemaker or a defibrillator, the
system is designed to modulate the strength of contraction of the heart
muscle rather than the rhythm. Pulses are delivered at regular intervals
throughout the day.
2.4 The device is recharged using a home-based charger system, typically
on a weekly basis. Charging sessions last about 40 to 60 minutes.
2.5 The aim is to improve the heart's contractility, therefore improving a
person's ability to exercise and quality of life.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 4 ---
Cardiac contractility modulation device implantation for heart failure (IPG655)
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 8 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 1 systematic review, 3 randomised controlled trials (2 of which
were also included in the review), 1 non-randomised comparative study
(included in the review) and 3 case series, and is presented in table 2 of
the interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the
appendix of the overview.
3.2 The committee considered the key efficacy outcomes to be improved
ejection fraction, oxygen consumption during and following stimulation,
New York Heart Association classification, rate of hospitalisation and
quality of life.
3.3 The committee considered the key safety outcomes to be
pneumothorax, infection, bleeding, arrhythmias and lead displacement.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee noted that there was a large placebo effect reported in
some of the studies.
3.6 The committee noted that the efficacy may be better in people with less
severe heart failure, and this underpinned their recommendation for more
research to identify the group of patients most likely to benefit from this
procedure.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3440-9
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
