=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "cardiovascular-disease-prevention-pdf-1996238687173.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:45:07.693336",
  "file_size_bytes": 491627,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/cardiovascular-disease-prevention-pdf-1996238687173.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Cardiovascular disease
prevention
Public health guideline
Published: 22 June 2010
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph25

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals
and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service.
It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the
responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in
consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the
guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to
use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and
developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate
unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health
inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be
inconsistent with complying with those duties.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
2 Inequalities and their contribution ................................................................................................... 55
3 Widening health inequalities ............................................................................................................ 55
4 Food taxes and subsidies ................................................................................................................ 55
5 Natural experiments ......................................................................................................................... 56
6 Regular daily intake of 2.5 g of stanols or sterols .......................................................................... 56
References ................................................................................................................................. 57
Appendix A: Membership of the Programme Development Group (PDG), the NICE
project team and external contractors .................................................................................... 65
Programme Development Group ........................................................................................................ 65
NICE project team ................................................................................................................................ 66
External contractors ............................................................................................................................. 67
Expert testimony .................................................................................................................................. 68
Appendix B: Summary of the methods used to develop this guidance ............................... 71
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 71
Key questions ....................................................................................................................................... 71
Reviewing the evidence ....................................................................................................................... 72
Economic analysis ................................................................................................................................ 74
Fieldwork ............................................................................................................................................... 75
How the PDG formulated the recommendations .............................................................................. 76
Appendix C: The evidence ....................................................................................................... 78
Evidence statements ........................................................................................................................... 81
Additional evidence ..............................................................................................................................104
Cost-effectiveness evidence .............................................................................................................. 105
Fieldwork findings ................................................................................................................................ 107
Appendix D: Gaps in the evidence ...........................................................................................109
Appendix E: supporting documents ........................................................................................ 110
Finding more information and committee details ................................................................... 112

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Overview
This guideline covers the main risk factors linked with cardiovascular disease: poor diet,
physical inactivity, smoking and excessive alcohol consumption. It aims to reduce the high
incidence of cardiovascular disease. This, in turn, will help prevent other major causes of
death and illness, such as type 2 diabetes and many cancers.
Who is it for?
• National government
• NHS and local authorities
• Industry
• Commissioners, managers and practitioners working in the above and in the wider
public, private, voluntary and community sectors
• Members of the public

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Introduction
The Department of Health (DH) asked the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) to produce public health guidance on the prevention of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) at population level.
CVD includes coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke and peripheral arterial disease. These
conditions are frequently brought about by the development of atheroma and thrombosis
(blockages in the arteries). They are also linked to conditions such as heart failure, chronic
kidney disease and dementia.
The guidance is for government, the NHS, local authorities, industry and all those whose
actions influence the population's cardiovascular health. This includes commissioners,
managers and practitioners working in local authorities and the wider public, private,
voluntary and community sectors. It may also be of interest to members of the public.
The guidance complements, but does not replace, NICE's guidance on smoking cessation
and prevention and tobacco control, physical activity, obesity, hypertension and maternal
and child nutrition. It will also complement NICE guidance on alcohol misuse. The
Programme Development Group (PDG) developed the recommendations on the basis of
reviews of the evidence, economic modelling, expert advice, stakeholder comments and
fieldwork.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
The evidence statements underpinning the recommendations are listed in appendix C. See
also the evidence reviews, supporting evidence statements and economic modelling
report.
Recommendations for policy: A national framework
for action
• Changes in cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors can be brought about by
intervening at the population and individual level. Government has addressed, and
continues to address, the risk factors at both levels.
• Interventions focused on changing an individual's behaviour are important and are
supported by a range of existing NICE guidance.
• Changes at the population-level could lead to further substantial benefits and this
guidance breaks new ground for NICE, by focusing on action to bring about such
changes. They may be achieved in a number of ways but national or regional policy
and legislation are particularly powerful levers. For more on the importance of
interventions aimed at the whole population, see considerations 1.12 to 1.15. Also for
reference, see:
－ Blas et al. (2008): Addressing social determinants of health inequities: what can
the state and civil society do?
－ Kelly et al. (2009a) A conceptual framework for public health: NICE's emerging

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
approach.
－ Marmot (2010) Fair society, healthy lives: strategic review of health inequalities in
England post 2010.
－ Rose (2008) Rose's strategy of preventive medicine. Commentary by Khaw and
Marmot.
• This guidance makes the case that CVD is a major public health problem.
• Recommendations 1 to 12 are based on extensive and consistent evidence. This
suggests that the policy goals identified provide the outline for a sound, evidence-
based national framework for action which is likely to be the most effective and cost-
effective way of reducing CVD at population level.
• It would require a range of legislative, regulatory and voluntary changes including the
further development of existing policies.
• The framework would be established through policy, led by the Department of Health.
It would involve government, government agencies, industry and key, non-
governmental organisations working together.
• The final decision on whether these policy options are adopted, and how they are
prioritised, will be determined by government through normal political processes.
• The recommendations for practice (recommendations 13 to 24) support and
complement, and are supported by, these policy options.
Who should take action?
• As well as the Department of Health, the following should be involved:
－ Chief Medical Officer
－ National Clinical Director for Coronary Heart Disease
－ Government Chief Scientific Adviser
－ Department of Health Chief Scientist
－ Advertising Standards Authority
－ Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
－ Department for Culture, Media and Sport
－ Department for Education
－ Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
－ Department for Transport
－ Department of Communities and Local Government
－ Food Standards Agency
－ HM Treasury
－ National Institute for Health Research
－ Ofcom
• Other research organisations (for example, the Medical Research Council and the
Economic and Social Research Council).
• Other key players include:
－ caterers
－ food and drink producers
－ food and drink retailers
－ marketing and media industries
－ national, non-governmental organisations including, for example, the British Heart
Foundation, Cancer Research UK, Diabetes UK, National Heart Forum, the Stroke
Association and other chronic disease charities
－ the farming sector.
Recommendation 1 Salt
• High levels of salt in the diet are linked with high blood pressure which, in turn, can
lead to stroke and coronary heart disease. High levels of salt in processed food have a
major impact on the total amount consumed by the population.
• Over recent years the food industry, working with the Food Standards Agency, has

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
made considerable progress in reducing salt in everyday foods. As a result, products
with no added salt are now increasingly available. However, it is taking too long to
reduce average salt intake among the population. Furthermore, average intake among
children is above the level recommended by Public Health England, and some children
consume as much salt as adults. Progress towards a low-salt diet needs to be
accelerated as a matter of urgency.
Policy goal
• Reduce population-level consumption of salt. To achieve this, the evidence suggests
that the following are among the measures that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Accelerate the reduction in salt intake among the population. Aim for a maximum
intake of 6 g per day per adult by 2015 and 3 g by 2025.
• Ensure children's salt intake does not exceed age-appropriate guidelines (these
guidelines should be based on up-to-date assessments of the available scientific
evidence).
• Promote the benefits of a reduction in the population's salt intake to the European
Union (EU). Introduce national legislation if necessary.
• Ensure national policy on salt in England is not weakened by less effective action in
other parts of the EU.
• Ensure food producers and caterers continue to reduce the salt content of commonly
consumed foods (including bread, meat products, cheese, soups and breakfast
cereals). This can be achieved by progressively changing recipes, products and
manufacturing and production methods.
• Establish the principle that children under 11 should consume substantially less salt
than adults. (This is based on advice from the Scientific Advisory Committee on
Nutrition.)
• Support the Food Standards Agency so that it can continue to promote, and take the
lead on, the development of EU-wide salt targets for processed foods.
• Establish an independent system for monitoring national salt levels in commonly

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
consumed foods.
• Ensure low-salt products are sold more cheaply than their higher salt equivalents.
• Clearly label products which are naturally high in salt and cannot meaningfully be
reformulated. Use the Food Standards Agency-approved traffic light system. The
labels should also state that these products should only be consumed occasionally.
• Discourage the use of potassium and other substitutes to replace salt. The aim of
avoiding potassium substitution is twofold: to help consumers' readjust their
perception of 'saltiness' and to avoid additives which may have other effects on
health.
• Promote best practice in relation to the reduction of salt consumption, as exemplified
in these recommendations, to the wider EU.
Recommendation 2 Saturated fats
• Reducing general consumption of saturated fat is crucial to preventing CVD. Over
recent years, much has been done (by the Food Standards Agency, consumers and
industry) to reduce the population's intake. Consumption levels are gradually moving
towards the goal set by the Food Standards Agency: to reduce population intake of
saturated fat from 13.3% to below 11% of food energy.
• However, a further substantial reduction would greatly reduce CVD and deaths from
CVD. Taking the example of Japan (where consumption of saturated fat is much lower
than in the UK), halving the average intake (from 14% to 6 to 7% of total energy) might
prevent approximately 30,000 CVD deaths annually. It would also prevent a
corresponding number of new cases of CVD annually. (Note that low-fat products are
not recommended for children under 2 years, but are fine thereafter.)
Policy goal
• Reduce population-level consumption of saturated fat. To achieve this, the evidence
suggests that the following are among the measures that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Encourage manufacturers, caterers and producers to reduce substantially the amount

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
of saturated fat in all food products. If necessary, consider supportive legislation.
Ensure no manufacturer, caterer or producer is at an unfair advantage as a result.
• Create the conditions whereby products containing lower levels of saturated fat are
sold more cheaply than high saturated fat products. Consider legislation and fiscal
levers if necessary.
• Create favourable conditions for industry and agriculture to produce dairy products for
human consumption that are low in saturated fat.
• Continue to promote semi-skimmed milk for children aged over 2 years. This is in line
with the American Heart Association's 2005 dietary recommendations for children and
adolescents.
Recommendation 3 Trans fats
• Industrially-produced trans fatty acids (IPTFAs) constitute a significant health hazard.
In recent years many manufacturers and caterers, with the encouragement of the
Food Standards Agency and other organisations, have considerably reduced the
amount of IPTFAs in their products. However, certain sections of the population may
be consuming a substantially higher amount of IPTFAs than average (for instance,
those who regularly eat fried fast-food). It is important to protect all social groups from
the adverse effects of IPTFAs.
• In some countries and regions (for instance, Denmark, Austria and New York), IPTFAs
have been successfully banned. A study for the European Parliament recently
recommended that it, too, should consider an EU-wide ban. In the meantime, some
large UK caterers, retailers and producers have removed IPTFAs from their products.
Policy goal
• Ensure all groups in the population are protected from the harmful effects of IPTFAs.
To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures
that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Eliminate the use of IPTFAs for human consumption.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• In line with other EU countries (specifically, Denmark and Austria), introduce legislation
to ensure that IPTFA levels do not exceed 2% in the fats and oils used in food
manufacturing and cooking.
• Direct the bodies responsible for national surveys to measure and report on
consumption of IPTFAs by different population subgroups, rather than only by mean
consumption across the population as a whole.
• Establish guidelines for local authorities to monitor independently IPTFA levels in the
restaurant, fast-food and home food trades using existing statutory powers (in relation
to trading standards or environmental health).
• Create and sustain local and national conditions which support a reduction in the
amount of IPTFAs in foods, while ensuring levels of saturated fat are not increased.
Encourage the use of vegetable oils high in polyunsaturated and monounsaturated
fatty acids to replace oils containing IPTFAs. Saturated fats should not be used as an
IPTFA substitute.
• Develop UK-validated guidelines and information for the food service sector and local
government on removing IPTFAs from the food preparation process. This will support
UK-wide implementation of any legislation produced on IPTFAs.
Recommendation 4 Marketing and promotions aimed at children
and young people
• Eating and drinking patterns get established at an early age so measures to protect
children from the dangers of a poor diet should be given serious consideration.
• Current advertising restrictions have reduced the number of advertisements for foods
high in fat, salt or sugar during television programmes made for children and young
people. However, advertisements, promotions, product placements and sponsorship
shown between programmes for older audiences also have a powerful influence on
children and young people. Marketing bans have been successfully introduced in
several other countries; evidence shows that a 9pm watershed for such TV
advertisements would reduce children and young people's exposure to this type of
advertising by 82%. (Office of Communications annex to consultation on television
advertising of food and drink to children).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Policy goal
Ensure children and young people under 16 are protected from all forms of marketing,
advertising and promotions (including product placements) which encourage an unhealthy
diet. To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures
that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Develop a comprehensive, agreed set of principles for food and beverage marketing
aimed at children and young people. This could be similar to the 'Sydney principles'
(Swinburn et al. 2008). They should be based on a child's right to a healthy diet.
• Extend TV advertising scheduling restrictions on food and drink high in fat, salt or
sugar (as determined by the Food Standards Agency's nutrient profile) up to 9pm.
• Develop equivalent standards, supported by legislation, to restrict the marketing,
advertising and promotion of food and drink high in fat, salt or sugar via all non-
broadcast media. This includes manufacturers' websites, use of the Internet generally,
mobile phones and other new technologies.
• Ensure restrictions for non-broadcast media on advertising, marketing and promotion
of food and drink high in fat, salt or sugar are underpinned by the Food Standards
Agency nutrient profiling system.
Recommendation 5 Commercial interests
• If deaths and illnesses associated with CVD are to be reduced, it is important that
food and drink manufacturers, retailers, caterers, producers and growers, along with
associated organisations, deliver goods that underpin this goal. Many commercial
organisations are already taking positive action.
Policy goal
Ensure dealings between government, government agencies and the commercial sector
are conducted in a transparent manner that supports public health objectives and is in line
with best practice. (This includes full disclosure of interests.) To achieve this, the following
are among the measures that should be considered.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
What action should be taken?
• Encourage best practice for all meetings, including lobbying, between the food and
drink industry and government (and government agencies). This includes full
disclosure of interests by all parties. It also involves a requirement that information
provided by the food and drink, catering and agriculture industries is available for the
general public and is auditable.
Recommendation 6 Product labelling
• Clear labelling which describes the content of food and drink products is important
because it helps consumers to make informed choices. It may also be an important
means of encouraging manufacturers and retailers to reformulate processed foods
high in saturated fats, salt and added sugars. Evidence shows that simple traffic light
labelling consistently works better than more complex schemes (Kelly et al. 2009).
Policy goals
• Ensure the Food Standards Agency's integrated front-of-pack labelling system is
rapidly implemented.
• Ensure labelling regulations in England are not adversely influenced by EU regulation.
To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures that
should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Establish the Food Standards Agency's single, integrated, front-of-pack traffic light
colour-coded system as the national standard for food and drink products sold in
England. This includes the simple, traffic light, colour-coding visual icon and text
which indicates whether food or drink contains a 'high', 'medium' or 'low' level of salt,
fat or sugar. It also includes text to indicate the product's percentage contribution to
the guideline daily amount (GDA) from each category.
• Consider using legislation to ensure universal implementation of the Food Standards
Agency's front-of-pack traffic light labelling system.
• Develop and implement nutritional labelling for use on shelves or packaging for bread,

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
cakes, meat and dairy products displayed in a loose or unwrapped state or packed on
the premises. The labelling should be consistent with the Food Standards Agency's
traffic light labelling system.
• Ensure food and drink labelling is consistent in format and content. In particular, it
should refer to salt (as opposed to sodium), the content per 100 g and use kcals as the
measure of energy.
• Continue to support the Food Standards Agency in providing clear information about
healthy eating.
• Ensure the UK continues to set the standard of best practice by pursuing exemption
from potentially less effective EU food labelling regulations when appropriate.
Recommendation 7 Health impact assessment (see also
recommendation 22)
• Policies in a wide variety of areas can have a positive or negative impact on CVD risk
factors, and frequently the consequences are unintended. The Cabinet Office has
indicated that, where relevant, government departments should assess the impact of
policies on the health of the population. Well-developed tools and techniques exist for
achieving this.
Policy goals
• Ensure government policy is assessed for its impact on CVD.
• Ensure any such assessments are adequately incorporated into the policy making
process.
To achieve this, the following are among the measures that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Assess (in line with the Cabinet Office requirement) all public policy and programmes
for the potential impact (positive and negative) on CVD and other related chronic
diseases. In addition, assess the potential impact on health inequalities. Assessments
should be carried out using health and policy impact assessment and other similar,
existing tools.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Monitor the outcomes of policy and programmes after the assessment and use them
to follow up and amend future plans.
• Make health impact assessment mandatory in specific scenarios. (Note that strategic
environmental assessment, environmental impact assessment and regulatory impact
assessment are already mandatory in certain contexts.)
Recommendation 8 Common agricultural policy
• The common agricultural policy (CAP) is the overarching framework used by EU
member countries to form their own agricultural policies. The burden of diet-related
disease has grown considerably since CAP was first implemented.
• CAP reform offers a significant opportunity to address the burden of CVD. However,
there are still a number of significant 'distortions' in relation to certain food prices and
production processes which potentially increase the burden of disease. Further reform
should aim to remove these distortions to promote health and wellbeing and to
provide a basis for UK government action to prevent CVD (Lloyd-Williams et al. 2008
and Lock et al. 2005).
• The CAP has 2 main 'pillars': market measures (first pillar) and rural development
policy (second pillar). Recent CAP reform has shifted money from the first to the
second pillar which now focuses more on 'public goods'. However, health has not been
formally recognised as a 'public good'.
• CAP reforms have begun to address this issue, but a clearer focus on CVD and its
antecedents (that is, the production of foods high in fat, sugar or salt) is needed.
Policy goals
• Ensure promoting health and reducing disease is made an explicit part of the CAP's
'public goods' so that European money promotes the wellbeing of EU citizens. The
scope of what are regarded as 'European public goods' in the EU is broader than the
strict definition of a 'public good' used by some economists.
• Ensure CAP spending takes adequate account of its potential impact on CVD risk
factors and is used in a way that optimises the public health outcomes.
• To achieve this, the following are among the measures that should be considered.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
What action should be taken?
• Negotiate at EU and national level to ensure the CAP takes account of public health
issues. Health benefits should be an explicit, legitimate outcome of CAP spending.
This can be achieved through formal recognition of health as a 'public good'.
• Progressively phase out payments under 'pillar one' so that all payments fall under
'pillar two'. This will allow for better protection of health, climate and the environment.
It will also improve and stimulate economic growth.
• Encourage the principle that future 'pillar two' funds should reward or encourage the
production of highly nutritious foods such as fruit, vegetables, whole grains and leaner
meats.
• Negotiate to ensure the European Commission's impact assessment procedure takes
cardiovascular health and other health issues into account. (Impact assessment is part
of the European Commission's strategic planning and programming cycle.)
Recommendation 9 Physically active travel (see also
recommendation 21)
• Travel offers an important opportunity to help people become more physically active.
However, inactive modes of transport have increasingly dominated in recent years. In
England, schemes to encourage people to opt for more physically active forms of
travel (such as walking and cycling) are 'patchy'.
Policy goal
• Ensure government funding supports physically active modes of travel.
To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures
that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Ensure guidance for local transport plans supports physically active travel. This can be
achieved by allocating a percentage of the integrated block allocation fund to
schemes which support walking and cycling as modes of transport.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Create an environment and incentives which promote physical activity, including
physically active travel to and at work.
• Consider and address factors which discourage physical activity, including physically
active travel to and at work. An example of the latter is subsidised parking.
Recommendation 10 Public sector catering guidelines (see also
recommendations 19 and 20)
• Public sector organisations are important providers of food and drink to large sections
of the population. It is estimated that they provide around one in three meals eaten
outside the home. Hence, an effective way to reduce the risk of CVD would be to
improve the nutritional quality of the food and drink they provide.
Policy goals
• Ensure publicly funded food and drink provision contributes to a healthy, balanced diet
and the prevention of CVD.
• Ensure public sector catering practice offers a good example of what can be done to
promote a healthy, balanced diet.
• To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures
that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Ensure all publicly funded catering departments meet Food Standards Agency-
approved dietary guidelines. This includes catering in schools, hospitals and public
sector work canteens.
• Assess the effectiveness of the government's healthier food mark pilot. If successful,
develop a timetable to implement it on a permanent basis.
Recommendation 11 Take-aways and other food outlets (see also
recommendations 23 and 24)
• Food from take-aways and other outlets (the 'informal eating out sector') comprises a

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
significant part of many people's diet. Local planning authorities have powers to
control fast-food outlets.
Policy goal
Empower local authorities to influence planning permission for food retail outlets in relation
to preventing and reducing CVD. To achieve this, the following are among the measures
that should be considered.
What action should be taken?
• Encourage local planning authorities to restrict planning permission for take-aways
and other food retail outlets in specific areas (for example, within walking distance of
schools). Help them implement existing planning policy guidance in line with public
health objectives. (See also recommendation 12.)
• Review and amend 'classes of use' orders for England to address disease prevention
via the concentration of outlets in a given area. These orders are set out in the Town
and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and subsequent amendments.
Recommendation 12 Monitoring
• CVD is responsible for around 33% of the observed gap in life expectancy among
people living in areas with the worst health and deprivation indicators compared with
those living elsewhere in England. Independent monitoring, using a full range of
available data, is vital when assessing the need for additional measures to address
such health inequalities, including those related to CVD.
Policy goal
Ensure all appropriate data are available for monitoring and analysis to inform CVD
prevention policy.
To achieve this, the evidence suggests that the following are among the measures that
should be considered.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
What action should be taken?
• Ensure data on CVD prevention is available for scrutiny by the public health community
as a whole.
• Ensure new econometric data (including pooled consumer purchasing data) are rapidly
made available by industry for monitoring and analysis by independent agencies.
• Use population surveys (including Public Health England's National Diet and Nutrition
Survey [NDNS] and the Low income diet and nutrition survey [LIDNS]) and data from
all relevant sources to monitor intake of nutrients for all population groups. (Sources
include: the Food Standards Agency, Department of Health, Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Office for National Statistics, the Public Health
Observatories, academic and other researchers.)
• Monitor the intake of salt, trans fatty acids, saturated fatty acids and mono and
polyunsaturated fatty acids among different population groups and report the findings
for those groups.
• Support the National diet and nutrition survey and the Low income diet and nutrition
survey.
• Ensure the CVD module (including lipid profile measures) routinely appears in the NHS
Digital's Health surveys for England.
• Develop an international public health information system (resembling GLOBALink) for
CVD prevention and use it to ensure widespread dissemination of these data.
Recommendations for practice
Recommendations 13 to 18 Regional CVD prevention programmes
• Recommendations 13 to 18 provide for a comprehensive regional and local CVD
prevention programme. They should all be implemented, following the order set out
below and in conjunction with recommendations 1 to 12, which they support. The aim
is to plan, develop and maintain effective programmes.
The target population for recommendations 13 to 18 and the list of who should take
action is outlined below. This is followed by the specific actions to be taken in relation

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
to each element of the programme.
Whose health will benefit?
• The population that falls within a local authority, primary care trust (PCT) area or
across combined PCT and local authority areas or within a particular region of the
country.
Who should take action?
Commissioners and providers of public health intervention programmes within:
• city region partnerships
• government regional offices
• local authorities
• local strategic partnerships
• non-governmental organisations, including charities and community groups
• PCTs
• strategic health authorities.
Recommendation 13 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
good practice principles
What action should be taken?
• Ensure a CVD prevention programme comprises intense, multi-component
interventions.
• Ensure it takes into account issues identified in recommendations 1 to 12.
• Ensure it includes initiatives aimed at the whole population (such as local policy and
regulatory initiatives) which complement existing programmes aimed at individuals at
high risk of CVD.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Ensure it is sustainable for a minimum of 5 years.
• Ensure appropriate time and resources are allocated for all stages, including planning
and evaluation.
Recommendation 14 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
preparation
What action should be taken?
• Gain a good understanding of the prevalence and incidence of CVD in the community.
Find out about any previous CVD prevention initiatives that have been run (including
any positive or negative experiences).
• Consider how existing policies relating to food, tobacco control and physical activity,
including those developed by the local authority, may impact on the prevalence of
CVD locally.
• Gauge the community's level of knowledge of, and beliefs about, CVD risk factors. This
includes beliefs that smoking is the only solace in life for people with little money, or
that only people who have a lot of money eat salad.
• Gauge how confident people in the community are that they can change their
behaviour to reduce the risks of CVD (see NICE's guideline on behaviour change:
general approaches).
• Identify groups of the population who are disproportionately affected by CVD and
develop strategies with them to address their needs.
• Take into account the community's exposure to risk factors (factors currently facing
adults and those emerging for children and younger people).
Recommendation 15 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
programme development
What action should be taken?
• Develop a population-based approach.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Ensure a 'programme theory' is developed and used to underpin the programme
(Pawson 2001). This should cover the reasons why particular actions are expected to
have particular outcomes.
• Ensure the programme helps address local area agreement targets and acts as a local
incentive to help meet the government's programme for world class commissioning in
the NHS. Also ensure it tackles health inequalities.
• Link the programme with existing strategies for targeting people at particularly high
risk of CVD and take account of ongoing, accredited screening activities by GPs and
other healthcare professionals. This includes the NHS Health Checks programme.
• Work closely with regional and local authorities and other organisations to promote
policies which are likely to encourage healthier eating, tobacco control and increased
physical activity. Policies may cover spatial planning, transport, food retailing and
procurement. Organisations that may get involved could include statutory, public
sector and civil society groups (examples of the latter are charities, clubs, self-help
and community groups).
When developing CVD programmes, take account of relevant recommendations in
NICE's guidelines on tobacco, walking and cycling, physical activity: brief advice for
adults in primary care, exercise referral schemes to promote physical activity,
behaviour change: general approaches, physical activity and the environment,
community engagement: improving health and wellbeing and reducing health
inequalities, maternal and child nutrition, physical activity in the workplace,
cardiovascular disease: identifying and supporting people most at risk of dying early,
physical activity for children and young people and overweight and obesity
management.
• Only develop, plan and implement a strategic, integrated media campaign as part of a
wider package of interventions to address CVD risk factors. Media campaigns should
be based on an acknowledged theoretical framework.
Recommendation 16 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
resources
What action should be taken?
• Ensure the programme lasts a minimum of 5 years (while subject to annual evaluation

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
reports) to maximise its potential impact.
• Produce a long-term plan, and gain political commitment, for funding to ensure the
programme has adequate resources and is sustainable beyond the end of the research
or evaluation period.
• Ensure the programme is adequately staffed. Avoid adding CVD prevention to the
workload of existing staff without relieving them of other tasks.
• Ensure volunteers are an additional (rather than a core) resource and that their training
and support is adequately resourced.
• Ensure steps are taken to retain staff.
• Where staff are recruited from the local community ensure, as far as possible, that
they reflect the local culture and ethnic mix.
• Ensure there are effective links with other existing and relevant community initiatives.
Recommendation 17 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
leadership
What action should be taken?
• Act as leader and governor of CVD prevention. Identify and articulate local community
needs and aspirations and how these may impact on the community's risk of CVD.
Reconcile these needs and aspirations or arbitrate on them to help prevent CVD (see
the Department for Communities and Local Government's 2008 statutory guidance on
creating strong, safe and prosperous communities).
• Identify senior figures within PCTs and local authorities as champions for CVD
prevention.
• Identify people to lead the CVD programme, including members of the local
community. Identify in advance, and provide for, the training and other needs of these
potential leaders.
• Develop systems within local strategic partnerships and other subregional or regional
partnerships for agreeing shared priorities with other organisations involved in CVD
prevention. Ensure senior staff are involved, as appropriate.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Recommendation 18 Regional CVD prevention programmes –
evaluation
What action should be taken?
• Establish baseline measures before the CVD programme begins. These should include
lifestyle and other factors that influence cardiovascular risk, as well as figures on CVD
prevalence and mortality. The establishment of such measures should be budgeted for
as part of the programme.
• Ensure evaluation is built in (in line with NICE's guideline on behaviour change: general
approaches). It should include the policies and activities of partner organisations
which are likely to influence CVD prevalence.
• Ensure appropriate methods (using multiple approaches and measures) are used to
evaluate the programme's processes, outcomes and measures or indicators.
Evaluation should include determining how acceptable the programme is to the local
community or the groups targeted.
• Ensure the results of evaluation are freely available and shared with partner
organisations. Use the findings to inform future activities.
Recommendation 19 Children and young people
Whose health will benefit?
• Children and young people aged under 16 years.
Who should take action?
• Parents and carers of children and young people under the age of 16.
• Local authorities (providers of cultural and leisure services).
• Schools (governors and teachers).
• Catering staff.
• Nursery nurses and workers in pre-school day care settings such as nurseries.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Managers of children's centres.
What action should they take?
• Help children and young people to have a healthy diet and lifestyle. This includes
helping them to develop positive, life-long habits in relation to food. This can be
achieved by ensuring the messages conveyed about food, the food and drink
available, and where it is consumed, is conducive to a healthy diet. (For more details,
see NICE's guidelines on maternal and child nutrition and physical activity for children
and young people).
• When public money is used to procure food and drink in venues outside the direct
control of the public sector, ensure those venues provide a range of affordable
healthier options (including from vending machines). Ideally, the healthier options
should be cheaper than the less healthy alternatives. For instance, carbonated or
sweetened drinks should not be the only options and fruit and water should be
available at an affordable price. (Examples of when public money is used in this way
include school visits to museums, sports centres, cinemas and fun parks.)
• Encourage venues frequented by children and young people and supported by public
money to resist sponsorship or product placement from companies associated with
foods high in fat, sugar or salt. (This includes fun parks and museums.)
• Organisations in the public sector should avoid sponsorship from companies
associated with foods high in fat, sugar or salt.
Recommendation 20 Public sector food provision
Whose health will benefit?
• Anyone who eats food provided by public sector organisations.
Who should take action?
• Education authorities.
• Government departments and agencies.
• Local authorities.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• NHS organisations.
• Prison services.
• The armed forces.
• The emergency services.
What action should they take?
• Ensure all food procured by, and provided for, people working in the public sector and
all food provided for people who use public services:
－ is low in salt and saturated fats
－ is nutritionally balanced and varied, in line with recommendations made in the
NHS eatwell guide
• does not contain industrially produced trans fatty acids (IPTFAs).
Recommendation 21 Physical activity
Whose health will benefit?
• Everyone.
Who should take action?
• Local authorities.
• PCTs.
What action should they take?
• Ensure the physical environment encourages people to be physically active (see
NICE's guideline on physical activity and the environment). Implement changes where
necessary. This includes prioritising the needs of pedestrians and cyclists over
motorists when developing or redeveloping highways. It also includes developing and
implementing public sector workplace travel plans that incorporate physical activity
(see NICE's guideline on physical activity in the workplace). Encourage and support

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
employers in other sectors to do the same.
• Ensure the need for children and young people to be physically active is addressed
(see NICE's guideline on physical activity for children and young people). This includes
providing adequate play spaces and opportunities for formal and informal physical
activity.
• Audit bye-laws and amend those that prohibit physical activity in public spaces (such
as those that prohibit ball games).
• Consider offering free swimming to parents and carers who accompany children aged
under 5 years to swimming facilities.
• Apportion part of the local transport plan (LTP) block allocation to promote walking,
cycling and other forms of travel that involve physical activity. The proportion
allocated should be in line with growth targets for the use of these modes of
transport.
• Ensure cycle tracks created under the Cycle Tracks Act 1984 are part of the definitive
map (the legal record of public rights of way).
• Align all 'planning gain' agreements with the promotion of heart health to ensure there
is funding to support physically active travel. (For example, Section 106 agreements
are sometimes used to bring development in line with the government's sustainable
development objectives).
Recommendation 22 Health impact assessments of regional and
local plans and policies
Whose health will benefit?
• Everyone.
Who should take action?
• Local policy makers.
• PCTs.
• Regional and local government.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
What action should they take?
• Use a variety of methods to assess the potential impact (positive and negative) that all
local and regional policies and plans may have on rates of CVD and related chronic
diseases. Take account of any potential impact on health inequalities.
• Identify those policies and plans that are likely to have a significant impact on CVD
rates. This can be achieved by using screening questions that cover the social,
economic and environmental determinants of CVD.
• Monitor the outcomes following an assessment and use this to follow up and amend
plans.
• Identify where expertise is required to carry out assessments and where this is
available locally.
• Identify the training and support needs of staff involved in carrying out assessments
and provide the necessary resources.
Recommendation 23 Take-aways and other food outlets
Whose health will benefit?
• Everyone but particularly those who frequently use these food outlets.
Who should take action?
• Environmental health officers.
• Local government planning departments.
• Public health nutritionists.
• Trading standards officers.
What action should they take?
• Use bye-laws to regulate the opening hours of take-aways and other food outlets,
particularly those near schools that specialise in foods high in fat, salt or sugar.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Use existing powers to set limits for the number of take-aways and other food outlets
in a given area. Directives should specify the distance from schools and the maximum
number that can be located in certain areas.
• Help owners and managers of take-aways and other food outlets to improve the
nutritional quality of the food they provide. This could include monitoring the type of
food for sale and advice on content and preparation techniques.
Recommendation 24 Nutrition training
Whose health will benefit?
• People eating snacks and meals provided by public sector services.
Who should take action?
• Caterers.
• Chartered Institute of Environmental Health (CIEH).
• Local authorities.
• Providers of hygiene training.
• The food and farming network (Feast).
What action should they take?
• Ensure the links between nutrition and health are an integral part of training for
catering managers. In particular, they should be made aware of the adverse effect that
frying practices and the use of salt, industrial trans fats and saturated fats can have
on health.
• Ensure they are aware of the healthy alternatives to frying and to using salt and sugar
excessively, based on the NHS eatwell guide.
• The PDG considers that all the recommended measures are cost effective.
• See the recommendations for research and gaps in the evidence.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Public health need and practice
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is generally due to reduced blood flow to the heart, brain or
body caused by atheroma or thrombosis. It is increasingly common after the age of 60, but
rare below the age of 30. Plaques (plates) of fatty atheroma build up in different arteries
during adult life. These can eventually cause narrowing of the arteries, or trigger a local
thrombosis (blood clot) which completely blocks the blood flow.
The main types of CVD are: coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke and peripheral arterial
disease (PVD) (British Heart Foundation 2009a).
Globally, CVD is the leading cause of death (World Health Organization 2007). It is also
associated with a large burden of preventable illnesses.
CVD in England and the UK
In England in 2007, CVD led to nearly 159,000 deaths (accounting for nearly 34% of all
deaths in England). This includes 74,185 deaths from coronary heart disease (CHD) and
43,539 from stroke (British Heart Foundation 2009b).
Most premature deaths from CVD, that is, among people aged less than 75 are
preventable. In 2006, CVD accounted for around 30% of premature deaths among men
and 21% among women, accounting for just over 40,000 premature deaths in that year.
The purpose of preventing premature death from CVD is to enable high quality life for as
long as possible.
An estimated 2.8 million men and 2.8 million women in the UK are living with CVD. The
British Heart Foundation estimates that around 111,000 people have a stroke for the first
time every year. Its 2009 report notes that national stroke audit data is more conservative,
putting the estimated 'first time' strokes a year at approximately 72,000 (33,000 among
men and 39,000 among women).
In addition, the British Heart Foundation estimates 96,000 new cases of angina in the UK
each year (52,000 among men and about 43,000 among women) and around 113,000
heart attacks per year (67,000 among men and 46,000 among women). New cases of
heart failure total around 68,000 a year (about 38,000 among men and 30,000 among

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
women).
Overall, CVD costs the UK approximately £30 billion annually (Luengo-Fernandez et al.
2006).
Despite recent improvements, death rates in the UK from CVD are relatively high
compared with other developed countries (only Ireland and Finland have higher rates).
There is also considerable variation within the UK itself, geographically, ethnically and
socially. For instance, premature death rates from CVD are up to six times higher among
lower socioeconomic groups than among more affluent groups (O'Flaherty et al. 2009). In
addition, death rates from CVD are approximately 50% higher than average among South
Asian groups (Allender et al. 2007).
The reduction in CVD-related risks among younger men (and perhaps women) over
previous years seems to have stalled in England from around 2003. This is also the case in
a number of other countries including Scotland (O'Flaherty et al. 2009), Australia (Wilson
and Siskind 1995) and the United States (Ford and Capewell 2007).
The higher incidence of CVD is a major reason why people living in areas with the worst
health and deprivation indicators have a lower life expectancy compared with those living
elsewhere in England. For males, it accounts for 35% of this gap in life expectancy (of that,
approximately 25% is due to CHD and 10% due to other forms of CVD). Among females, it
accounts for 30% of the gap (DH 2008a).
Risk factors for CVD
Lifetime risk of CVD is strongly influenced by diet and physical activity levels since
childhood (National Heart Forum 2003). The risk among adults is determined by a variety
of 'upstream' factors (such as food production and availability, access to a safe
environment that encourages physical activity and access to education). It is also
influenced by 'downstream' behavioural issues (such as diet and smoking).
In more than 90% of cases, the risk of a first heart attack is related to nine potentially
modifiable risk factors (Yusuf et al. 2004):
• smoking/tobacco use
• poor diet

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• high blood cholesterol
• high blood pressure
• insufficient physical activity
• overweight or obesity
• diabetes
• psychosocial stress (linked to people's ability to influence the potentially stressful
environments in which they live)
• excess alcohol consumption.
Other factors, such as maternal nutrition and air pollution may also be linked to the disease
(Allender et al. 2007).
How these risk factors cause many other illnesses
Addressing diet, physical inactivity, smoking and excessive alcohol consumption to reduce
CVD will also help reduce a wide range of other chronic conditions. This includes many of
the other main causes of death and illness in England such as type 2 diabetes and many
common cancers (see also 3.73).
Type 2 diabetes, which affects over two million people in the UK, is associated with being
overweight and sedentary. (It also accounts for an estimated 5% of UK healthcare
expenditure.) Between 8% and 42% of certain cancers (endometrial, breast, and colon) are
attributable to excess body fat.
The report 'Food matters' (Cabinet Office 2008) estimates that a total of around 70,000
lives would be saved each year in the UK if people's diet matched the nutritional guidelines
on fruit and vegetable consumption and saturated fat, added sugar and salt intake.
Tackling the risk factors
Reducing the risks, for example, by quitting tobacco or improving the diet (so reducing
cholesterol or blood pressure levels) can rapidly reduce the likelihood of developing CVD.
Actions which impact on the whole population most effectively reduce these risk factors
(Kelly et al. 2009a).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Some population-based prevention programmes have been accompanied by a substantial
reduction in the rate of CVD deaths. However, the degree to which these are attributable
to the programme is contested. This is due to a number of reasons including:
• It is difficult to design studies which evaluate entire cities, regions or countries or are
of sufficient duration.
• Control sites can become 'contaminated' (that is, if the intervention affects people
living in the control area).
• There may be unreasonable expectations about the speed of change.
• Behaviour change is often erratic or slow.
• Failure to address 'upstream' influences such as policy or manufacturing and
commercial practices.
The crucial importance of using policy to modify population-wide CVD risk factors has
been recognised on an international, European and national level. For example, the World
Health Organization's (WHO) first global treaty on health, the 'Framework convention on
tobacco control' (2003) undertook to enact key tobacco control measures, such as
tobacco tax increases, smokefree public places and tobacco advertising controls. Parties
to the treaty included the UK.
In 2004, WHO member states also agreed to a non-binding global strategy on diet,
physical activity and health. In addition, since 1993 the European Union (EU) has legislated
on issues such as advertising and the labelling of consumer products like food and
tobacco.
In 2009, the Cardio and Vascular Coalition published 'Destination 2020', the voluntary
sector's plan for cardiac and vascular health in England (Cardio and Vascular Coalition
2009).
Government policy
Government policy in many areas influences CVD. The 'Choosing health' white paper (DH
2004) set priorities for action on nutrition, physical activity, obesity and tobacco control. It
was supported by delivery plans on food, physical activity and tobacco control, including
the provision of NHS Stop Smoking Services.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Since that time, a wide variety of policy documents have been published including:
• Active travel strategy (Department for Transport 2010)
• A smokefree future: a comprehensive tobacco control strategy for England (DH 2010)
• Be active be healthy. A plan for getting the nation moving (DH 2009a)
• Commissioning framework for health and well-being (DH 2007a)
• Delivering choosing health: making healthier choices easier (DH 2005a)
• Food 2030 (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 2010)
• Health challenge England – next steps for choosing health (DH 2006a)
• Health inequalities: progress and next steps (DH 2008b)
• Healthy weight, healthy lives: a cross-government strategy for England (DH 2008c)
• National stroke strategy (DH 2007b)
• NHS 2010 – 2015: from good to great. Preventative, people-centred, productive (DH
2009b)
• Our health, our care, our say (DH 2006b)
• Putting prevention first – vascular checks: risk assessment and management (DH
2008d)
• Tackling health inequalities – a programme for action (DH 2003)
• Tackling health inequalities: what works (DH 2005b)
• Tackling health inequalities: 2007 status report on the programme for action (DH
2008a)
• The NHS in England: the operating framework for 2006/7 (DH 2006c)
• The NHS in England: the operating framework for 2008/9 (DH 2007c)
• Wanless report: securing good health for the whole population (Wanless 2004).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Considerations
The Programme Development Group (PDG) took account of a number of factors and issues
when developing the recommendations.
Introduction
1.1 Evidence was presented on how to prevent or reduce the combination of
modifiable risk factors that can cause cardiovascular disease (CVD). The PDG
also considered evidence and expert testimony on separate key risk factors. The
reviews, together with the expert testimonies, are listed in appendix A. Relevant
existing NICE guidance was also summarised.
1.2 The key CVD risk factors that can be modified are: smoking, a poor diet, obesity,
lack of physical activity and high alcohol consumption (Emberson et al. 2004;
Yusuf et al. 2004). CVD risk factors tend to 'cluster together'. Thus people who
smoke are more likely to have a poor diet and exercise less. This 'clustering' also
tends to have a disproportionate effect on people who are disadvantaged, further
accentuating health inequalities.
1.3 The PDG noted that approximately 100,000 people die from smoking-related
diseases in the UK every year. Tobacco accounts for approximately 29% of
deaths from cancer, 13% of cardiovascular deaths and 30% of deaths from
respiratory disease (Action on Smoking and Health 2008). It also acknowledged
that smoking accounts for over half the disproportionate burden of illnesses
experienced by disadvantaged groups. The PDG strongly endorsed the national
tobacco control measures set out in 'Beyond smoking kills' (Action on Smoking
and Health 2008).
1.4 Approaches to helping people quit smoking, or to stop using other forms of
tobacco, are covered by NICE's guideline on tobacco. As a result, tobacco issues
are not covered in this guidance.
1.5 The PDG noted that nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) can help to reduce CVD
among people who are addicted to nicotine. It fully endorses the Tobacco

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Advisory Group's recommendations on the regulation and marketing of NRT
(Royal College of Physicians 2007). (The report advocates making NRT more
acceptable and accessible to people who smoke and who find it impossible to
quit.)
1.6 Taking a population-based approach, the PDG focused on the major contributors
to CVD risk found in the typical UK diet. These include: a high intake of saturated
and industrially-produced trans fatty acids and salt. It acknowledged and
supports the work of the Food Standards Agency and other organisations (such
as the Advertising Standards Authority) in helping to reduce general consumption
of these products. However, it believes further action is essential to achieve
greater reductions in premature death and disease and to reduce health
inequalities.
1.7 A consistent message on lifestyle risk factors related to CVD is important.
1.8 The recommendations made in this guidance are not intended to replace existing
advice to the public on diet. Rather, they will support the next stage of policy
development to tackle the substantial burden of ill health from CVD and other
chronic diseases (see also the section on public health need and practice). This
includes the development of effective local and regional, population-level
programmes to prevent CVD, diabetes, obesity, kidney disease and some
common cancers.
1.9 In response to stakeholder feedback, the PDG considered the evidence on
interventions targeting specific CVD risk factors. For example, in relation to salt,
saturated fats and trans fatty acids.
1.10 Policies to promote physical activity were considered. However, physical activity,
smoking and obesity have all been covered by other NICE guidance. In addition,
as policies to increase the consumption of fresh fruit and vegetables are already
agreed and widely implemented, the PDG did not consider them in detail.
Population versus individual approach
1.11 CVD risk factors can be reduced in a number of ways. Two different (and

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
frequently, complementary) approaches are often described as 'individual-' and
'population-based'. The former involves interventions which tend to give people
direct encouragement to change their behaviour. It may involve providing
information about the health risks of their current behaviour, advice (such as to
be more active) or prescribing a treatment. Alternatively, it may involve altering
the way the NHS and other organisations deliver prevention or healthcare
services. Population-based interventions, on the other hand, aim to change the
risks from the social, economic, material and environmental factors that affect an
entire population. This can be achieved through regulation, legislation, subsidy
and taxation or rearranging the physical layout of communities. The PDG focused
on population-based approaches.
1.12 The NHS Health Check programme, which was being rolled out as this guidance
was published, is aimed at all those aged 40 to 74. It will ensure everyone in this
age range is assessed to determine their risk of heart disease, stroke, kidney
disease and diabetes. It will also help them to reduce or manage that risk by
providing individually tailored advice. This guidance complements the NHS Health
Check programme by focusing on the CVD risk factors for an entire population. It
will benefit the NHS, local authorities and industry, as well as individuals, by
substantially reducing the number of people who need statin or anti-hypertensive
medication. It will also enable services to focus more on those who still need
treatment.
1.13 The PDG recognised that smoking cessation and other services that focus on
helping individuals to change their behaviour have an important role to play in
preventing CVD. Many of these services or approaches have been the focus of
earlier NICE guidance.
1.14 Previously in the UK, interventions focused on individuals have tended to
dominate CVD prevention activities and it is important to identify and treat those
who are at higher risk. However, a much larger overall benefit could be achieved
by making changes (albeit small ones) among any given population as a whole.
As indicated by the Rose hypothesis, a small reduction in risk among a large
number of people may prevent many more cases, rather than treating a small
number at higher risk. A whole-population approach explicitly focuses on
changing everyone's exposure to risk (Rose 2008).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
1.15 There is growing evidence in support of the Rose hypothesis (see point above).
For instance, data were recently pooled from six general population cohort
studies involving 109,954 European participants. These data were analysed to
compare different CVD strategies. The analysis found that a 10%, population-
wide reduction in blood cholesterol, blood pressure and smoking prevalence
would save approximately 9120 lives per million population over 10 years. In
contrast, treating 40% of high-risk individuals with a 'polypill' (containing a statin,
three half-dose anti-hypertensives and aspirin) would save about 3720 lives per
million, even assuming complete, long-term adherence (Cooney et al. 2009).
1.16 It should be noted that, as indicated above, population- and individual-based
approaches are both important and can be complementary. They do not have to
be considered as alternatives for CVD prevention.
Population-based approaches: health inequalities
1.17 Both population- and individual-based approaches can influence health
inequalities. However, population-based approaches may be more likely to reduce
health inequalities. That is because there are many reasons why people who are
disadvantaged might find it more difficult to change their behaviour than those
who are affluent (Swann et al. 2009). As a result, some activities aimed at
individuals may inadvertently increase health inequalities.
1.18 'Upstream', population-level interventions include: fiscal measures (such as
taxation), national or regional policy and legislation (such as legislation on
smokefree public places or the way food is produced); and environmental
changes. They are not reliant on an individual's knowledge or ability to choose
healthier options. Social and economic action can also change people's risk of
CVD (in such cases, the health outcomes are side effects, albeit desirable).
1.19 The recommendations in this guidance do not, in the main, rely on individual
choice. Rather, they aim to improve social environments and thus ensure the
healthy choice is the easy choice. The emphasis is on changing policies, systems,
regulations, the physical environment and other 'upstream' factors. This approach
is likely to reduce, rather than increase, health inequalities and is congruent with
NICE's guidance on behaviour change.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Population-level approaches: cost effectiveness
1.20 The financial modelling for this guidance shows that considerable cost savings
could be made. Using a number of conservative assumptions, it found that
halving CVD events across England and Wales (a population of 50 million) would
result in discounted savings in healthcare costs of approximately £14 billion per
year. Reducing mean population cholesterol or blood pressure levels by 5% would
result in discounted annual savings of approximately £0.7 billion and £0.9 billion
respectively. Reducing population cardiovascular risk by even 1% would generate
discounted savings of approximately £260 million per year.
1.21 A 3 g reduction in mean daily salt intake by adults (to achieve a target of 6 g
daily) would lead to around 14,000 to 20,000 fewer deaths from CVD annually
(Strazzullo et al. 2009). Using conservative assumptions, this means
approximately £350 million in healthcare costs would be saved. In addition,
approximately 130,000 quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) would be gained. A
mean reduction of 6 g per day would double the benefits: an annual saving of
£700 million in healthcare costs and a gain of around 260,000 QALYs. A 3 g
reduction in daily salt intake (a reasonably conservative estimate of what could
be achieved) would reduce systolic blood pressure by approximately 2 mmHg.
This would equate to a 2% decrease in the risk reduction model. Similarly, a
reduction of IPTFA intake to approximately 0.7% of total fat energy might save
approximately 571,000 life years, and some £2 billion.
Epidemiology
1.22 The PDG noted that CVD death rates are no longer falling among young and
middle aged people in the UK (for instance, they are no longer falling among
those aged 35 to 54 in the most socially disadvantaged groups in Scotland), the
USA and Australia. This reflects a combination of adverse risk factors including
smoking, a poor diet and disadvantage (O'Flaherty et al. 2009).
1.23 The prevalence of obesity and overweight continues to rise (National Heart
Forum 2010). This, in turn, will lead to a rise in type 2 diabetes which can increase
the risk of CVD. The risk of CHD is particularly high among women with diabetes
(Barrett-Connor et al. 1991).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
1.24 Epidemiological studies indicate that approximately 45 to 75% of the recent fall in
CVD deaths in Westernised industrialised countries was the result of a reduction
in the major risk factors. This includes a reduction in smoking prevalence and salt
and saturated fat consumption.
1.25 The decline in CVD deaths noted above began long before effective treatments
were introduced. In Finland and Iceland, coronary heart disease mortality rates
declined by 63% between 1982 and 1997. Seventy five per cent of this was
attributed to a reduction in smoking, blood pressure and cholesterol levels
(Aspelund et al. 2009; Laatikainen et al. 2005). Sweden also observed a large
reduction in CVD-related mortality. This was attributed to dietary reductions in
cholesterol and blood pressure. In contrast, blood pressure and cholesterol levels
in the UK have, thus far, only fallen a modest amount (Unal et al. 2005).
1.26 The fall in blood pressure and cholesterol levels seen in many Western
populations are mainly attributable to lifestyle changes and changes in the wider
determinants of health, rather than to medication. Changes to the wider
determinants of health have often been as a consequence of public health policy.
Preventive services are unlikely to tackle these wider determinants unless
supported by national policies and systems (Capewell and O'Flaherty 2008).
1.27 Data from 'natural experiments' in a whole population (where there were no
randomised controlled trials to assess the results) provide compelling evidence of
the links between CVD and diet. Rapid and large falls in CVD deaths have been
observed in diverse populations including those living in Poland, Mauritius,
Finland, Iceland and Norway. In Poland, a 26% decrease in coronary deaths
followed a substantial reduction in the consumption of animal fats and increased
consumption of vegetable oils and fruit after the break-up of the Soviet Union
(Zatonski and Willett 2005). In Mauritius, CVD deaths fell following the
introduction of legislation to make it mandatory to use polyunsaturated oils as a
substitute for highly saturated cooking oils (Dowse et al. 1995). A substantial fall
in CVD deaths also followed a reduction in saturated fat intake in Finland, Iceland,
Norway and elsewhere (Zatonski and Willet 2005, Laatikainen et al. 2005.)
Conversely, rapid rises in CVD mortality have been seen in China and elsewhere,
principally due to the adoption of a Western diet rich in saturated fats (Critchley
et al. 2004).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
1.28 The PDG discussed the nature and quality of evidence relevant to CVD
prevention in whole populations. As indicated in consideration 3.71, this evidence
is not drawn from randomised trials alone. The PDG felt it important to consider
natural experiments and observational studies as well. The studies had to include
a known cause–effect mechanism and an association which was both strong and
consistent.
Primordial prevention
1.29 The PDG noted the importance of taking action to prevent the elevation of CVD
risk factors among children, by ensuring they have a healthy, balanced diet and
are physically active. This supports the principle of 'primordial prevention'. In this
context, this means ensuring the low cholesterol and blood pressure levels seen
in normal childhood are maintained throughout life (Labarthe 1999). This is crucial
to prevent risk factor 'tracking' whereby, for instance, children with obesity,
elevated blood pressure or raised cholesterol are very likely to become adults
with above-average risk-factor levels. There is also a strong association between
early abuse and neglect and subsequent depression, drug abuse and ischemic
heart disease. In addition, some evidence suggests that childhood maltreatment,
including both abuse and neglect, influences depression and heart disease in
ways that are gender-dependent.
1.30 Maternal and fetal nutrition may have an important influence on whether or not
people develop CVD later in life. Some evidence suggests that breastfeeding may
protect against the development of risk factors for CVD. For example, it is
associated with small reductions in blood pressure (Martin et al. 2005) and serum
cholesterol. It is also associated with a reduced risk of being overweight (Harder
et al. 2005) or having type 2 diabetes. However, the evidence on breastfeeding
per se as a means of preventing CVD is weak (Owen et al. 2006; 2008).
1.31 The PDG recognised the many benefits of breastfeeding (including the benefits
of continuing to breastfeed beyond the recommended first 6 months after birth).
However, it concluded that there was insufficient evidence to make a
recommendation related to CVD prevention. Note: NICE's guideline on maternal
and child nutrition is referred to in the recommendations.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Single risk factors
1.32 The Strategy Unit report 'Food matters' (2008) concluded that some 70,000
premature UK deaths could be avoided with a healthier diet. More recently, the
Food Standards Agency suggested that poor dietary health in the UK could
contribute to up to 150,000 CVD deaths, and a further 155,000 cancer deaths,
per year (Food Standards Agency 2009).
1.33 Much of the observational evidence that links diet to CVD is based on individual
nutrients. However, the PDG recognised that their impact should also be
considered in the context of the whole diet. It recognised that a 'healthier' diet is
likely to comprise a favourable balance of food and nutrients and a reduction in
the intake of harmful elements. In a typical Western diet, the latter include
substantial amounts of salt, saturated fat and trans fats (Hu 2008).
1.34 A 'healthier' diet based on fruit, legumes, pulses, other vegetables, wholegrain
foods, fish and poultry is consistently associated with lower levels of CVD risk
factors (Fung et al. 2001; Lopez-Garcia et al. 2004) and lower CVD mortality
(Heidemann et al. 2008; Osler et al. 2001). Vegetarian and 'Mediterranean' diets
are also consistently associated with lower CVD mortality (Hu 2008; Mann et al.
2009). Interventions promoting these types of 'healthier' diet have been shown to
be highly effective in reducing blood pressure, cholesterol and subsequently CVD
(Appel et al. 1997; de Lorgeril et al. 1999).
1.35 The PDG emphasised its support for a healthy diet, as advocated in the 'eatwell'
plate (Food Standards Agency 2007).
1.36 The PDG discussed whether it would be feasible for food labels to present calorie
content in terms of the hours of physical activity required to use them up. There
was no evidence to support this approach. However, there is evidence that
presenting the total calorific content on food labels might help reduce intake
(Ludwig and Brownell 2009).
1.37 Salt intake is a major determinant of CVD in the UK, mainly due to its effect on
blood pressure. On average, 70% to 90% of people's intake comes from salt
added during the manufacturing process; only 10% to 30% comes from adding it
during cooking or at the table. Reducing the population's salt intake will,

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
therefore, involve encouraging the food industry to reduce the salt used in
processed foods, as well as encouraging people to reduce the salt they add
themselves. The PDG believes the former will best be achieved by using a
combination of voluntary and regulatory action.
1.38 The UK population's per capita daily salt intake has fallen by 0.9 g in the last 5
years (a reduction of around 2% per year). This means people are consuming an
average 8.6 g of salt per day. The reduction has mainly come about as a result of
public awareness campaigns and a voluntary code of practice for industry, led by
the Food Standards Agency. The voluntary agreement came into force in 2004
and was followed by progressive targets (in 2006 and 2009). The campaigns,
which cost just £15 million, led to approximately 6000 fewer CVD deaths per year,
saving the UK economy approximately £1.5 billion per annum. The PDG noted the
new targets for 2010 and 2012.
1.39 Recent evidence shows that it is feasible to reduce the salt content of foods even
further and that this would lead to substantial health benefits (Appel and
Anderson 2010). For example, a 10% reduction in the salt content of items like
bread and soup is not detected by consumers and does not, therefore, affect
consumer choice. This would reduce both strokes and cardiovascular events. A
reduction in mean salt intake of 3 g per day for adults (to achieve a target of 6 g
daily) would lead to around 14,000 to 20,000 fewer deaths from CVD annually
(Strazzullo et al. 2009). Using conservative assumptions, this means
approximately 130,000 quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) would be gained and
around £350 million would be saved in healthcare costs. A reduction of 6 g per
day would lead to twice the gain: some 260,000 QALYs and an annual saving of
£700 million in healthcare costs.
1.40 Many children in the UK may be consuming as much salt as adults (He et al.
2008). Indeed, single helpings of soup or 'meal deals' may contain as much as 3 g
of salt. Currently, it is recommended that: children aged from 1 to 3 years should
consume no more than 2 g salt a day (0.8 g sodium); from 4 to 6 years they
should consume no more than 3 g salt a day (1.2 g sodium); and from 7 to 10
years a maximum of 5 g salt a day (2 g sodium) (Scientific Advisory Committee
on Nutrition 2003).
1.41 The PDG discussed the benefits of substituting mono-unsaturated or

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
polyunsaturated fats for saturated fats (Hu 2008) and of reducing total fat
consumption. Evidence suggests that reducing saturated fat intake from 14% to
7% of energy intake (to reach the levels seen in Japan) might prevent around
30,000 CVD deaths annually. Changes in CVD deaths are also addressed in
consideration 3.27.
1.42 The PDG discussed whether to recommend 'low' rather than 'full-fat' products as
there is a risk that if saturated fat is removed to create a 'low-fat' product, it could
still be used in another product, with no overall reduction in the population's fat
consumption. In addition, the Group felt that there was a risk that some fat
content would be replaced with high levels of sugar, so losing some of the benefit
of reducing calorie intake.
1.43 The PDG discussed the potential problems that might arise if low-fat milk was
made cheaper than full-fat milk. In general, most of the population should aim for
a low-fat diet. However, full-fat products are the 'healthier' choice for some
groups. Children aged under 2, for instance, may need the additional calories and
fat-soluble vitamins found in full-fat milk and the PDG noted that full-fat milk is
recommended for this group when cow's milk is being used. The Group was
concerned that increasing the relative price of full-fat milk (to make lower-fat milk
a more attractive option) could place an added financial burden on
disadvantaged groups. However, it also believed that this added burden could be
addressed by the tax and benefits system.
1.44 The PDG agreed with the 2009 World Health Organization (WHO) review of
industrially-produced trans fatty acids (IPTFAs), also known as partially
hydrogenated vegetable oils (PHVOs). In line with the WHO review, the PDG
concluded that IPTFAs are unnecessary and 'toxic' and should be eliminated from
foodstuffs. The WHO review states that because IPTFAs are produced by partial
hydrogenation they are not normally present naturally in foods and have no
known health benefits. The review defined them as 'industrial additives'. It
recommended that food services, restaurants, and food and cooking fat
manufacturers should avoid their use (Uauy et al. 2009). A recent study
commissioned by the European Parliament advocated that an EU-wide ban on
IPTFAs should be considered. The PDG noted that IPTFAs have been successfully
banned in Denmark and New York City.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
1.45 The WHO review of industrially-produced trans fatty acids noted that people who
use partially hydrogenated vegetable oils (PHVOs) for cooking would have mean
trans fatty acids intakes considerably higher than the national average. The same
would be true for those who eat a high proportion of industrially processed or
'fast food'. The review noted that '…replacing TFAs [trans fatty acids] with
vegetable oils high in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and monounsaturated
fatty acids (MUFA) is the preferred option for health benefits… Eliminating use of
TFA-containing PHVO [partially hydrogenated vegetable oils] should be
considered as hazard removal, in line with risk management models used to
address many other food safety issues.' The PDG concurred.
1.46 Assuming a linear dose response, if less than 1% of food energy came from
IPTFAs, between 4500 and nearly 7000 lives might be saved in England.
1.47 The PDG commended the substantial efforts made by much of the UK-based
food industry and the Food Standards Agency to remove IPTFAs from the UK
food chain. It also noted the review of trans fats by the Scientific Advisory
Committee on Nutrition (SACN). New concerns have now emerged, particularly in
relation to imported products and fried food prepared in some settings. People
from disadvantaged groups are likely consume more of these products which, in
turn, could be an important contributory factor to health inequalities.
1.48 Some products (this includes fried food from take-away venues) may contain
substantial levels of IPTFAs. The PDG noted that some people may be consuming
this sort of meal on a frequent basis. Hence, it considered that IPTFA
consumption across different population groups is relevant, and that simply
looking at average intake will not suffice.
1.49 The Group discussed the links between sedentary behaviour and CVD, and the
need to encourage people to be more physically active. However, evidence on
how to address sedentary behaviour is not well developed and remains an area
for further study.
1.50 The PDG noted the importance of ensuring physical activity is enjoyable and can
be incorporated into daily life. Effective interventions to encourage physical
activity are possible both nationally and locally. For example, NICE has made
recommendations on how to help people to be physically active in guidelines on

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
walking and cycling, physical activity: brief advice for adults in primary care,
exercise referral schemes to promote physical activity, physical activity and the
environment, physical activity in the workplace and physical activity for children
and young people.
Achieving change: national level
1.51 Public, private, voluntary and community sector organisations all have a role to
play in preventing CVD at national level. For example, measures to encourage
commercial markets to be health promoting could be highly cost saving (Abelson
2003; Catford 2009; Trust for America's Health 2008; Wanless 2004). Such
measures might include: improving the content of products (re-formulation);
controls on the marketing of energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods, foods high in fat,
salt or sugar and processed foods; and package labelling.
1.52 Those preparing, producing and selling food have a particularly important role in
improving the diet of the nation. Although such organisations must consider their
commercial interests, the PDG considers it also reasonable to expect them to
work with others to help prevent CVD. It takes this view in light of the diseases
and deaths caused by CVD (and the consequent costs to the exchequer and
society). The PDG recognised that many responsible commercial organisations
are already taking positive action. Many organisations, for instance, have taken
praiseworthy action to reduce the salt or saturated fat content of food, or to
remove industrially-produced trans fats from their processes (Brownell and
Warner 2009).
1.53 The PDG believes that more could be done to assist those sectors which have,
for a variety of reasons, been unable or unwilling to take positive action. Such
action would not only benefit the population, but would also help provide a 'level
playing field', where all businesses work to the same standard. Brownell and
Warner (2009) state: 'there is an opportunity if the industry chooses to seize it –
an opportunity to talk about the moral high ground and to occupy it'.
1.54 Advertising and other marketing activities have an important influence on
consumption patterns. They encourage people to change brands and they also
encourage overall increases in consumption of related brands.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
1.55 The PDG noted the work of the Advertising Standards Authority and others to
develop the existing overarching regulatory system that controls food advertising
aimed at children. Furthermore, the Group noted and praised the important work
involved in developing the current UK advertising regulations. The Ofcom/Food
Standards Agency restrictions on TV advertisements for foods high in salt, fat or
sugar aimed at children are a good example of these regulations being put into
practice. However, the PDG felt that children are particularly vulnerable and need
further protection from commercial pressures. The 'Sydney principles' (developed
by the International Obesity Taskforce Working Group in Sydney, Australia
[Swinburn et al. 2007]) provide for the type of protection that it believes is still
needed in the UK. The principles state that any action to reduce marketing to
children should: support their rights; afford them substantial protection; be
statutory in nature; take a wide definition of commercial promotion; guarantee
commercial-free childhood settings; include cross-border media; and be
evaluated, monitored and enforced. In other words, the PDG considers that a
comprehensive model which includes marketing, advertising, promotion and
product placement would provide the necessary protection.
1.56 Advertising restrictions are gaining support. In 2007, WHO called for
recommendations to restrict food marketing to children. Examples of jurisdictions
that have successfully introduced such restrictions now include Norway, Sweden,
Belgium, Greece, Romania and Quebec.
1.57 National policy has an important role in changing the risk factors faced by a
population (both direct, indirect and unintentional). However, the PDG recognised
that developing and implementing such policy is a highly complex process: it is
not linear and rarely moves simply from design to implementation. In addition, the
Group acknowledged that evidence alone is rarely sufficient to bring about policy
change.
1.58 The way research evidence influences the policy process and gets translated into
action can be explained by a model such as Kingdon's (1995) 'policy windows'.
This suggests that 'windows' open (and close) by the coupling (or de-coupling) of
three 'streams': problems, policies and politics. It can be applied nationally and
locally (Exworthy et al. 2002). Other policy models also provide a potentially
valuable insight into this complex, non-linear process. Whichever model is
applied, however, all parties concerned need to acknowledge that the problem is

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
important. In addition, it has to be possible to devise policies to remedy it, and
there has to be a political willingness to act. Examples from other countries of
where policy has been successfully used to reduce CVD are particularly valuable
in showing what could be achieved in the UK.
1.59 This guidance has made the case unequivocally that CVD is a major and, most
significantly, a preventable problem. It has also identified policy options which
would be effective at the population level.
1.60 Nationally, the campaigning activities of charities such as the British Heart
Foundation, the National Heart Forum and others focused on chronic diseases
are particularly influential.
1.61 Voluntary action may be effective. However, if the pace of change is insufficient
mandatory measures may be needed. The success of legislation banning tobacco
advertising and smoking in public places followed unsuccessful voluntary
agreements with industry. This also demonstrates the effectiveness of national
government action to improve the public's health.
Achieving change: the regional, community and
private sectors
1.62 Regional government offices and strategic health authorities could make an
important contribution to CVD prevention. For example, they could negotiate to
maximise the number of local area agreements (LAAs) that include 'stretch'
targets related to CVD. They could also ensure all PCT 'world class
commissioning' strategies for healthcare adequately address CVD prevention at a
population and individual level. This involves having long-term strategies for
sustainable change that avoid an over-dependence on medical solutions. There is
also scope for effective action by public sector bodies at a sub-regional level.
This was the case in Merseyside where, prior to the national ban on smoking in
public places, a private members bill supporting local smoking restrictions had
been developed in case national legislation was delayed.
1.63 Local authorities and PCTs, working with the private and 'the third sector' in local

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
strategic partnerships (LSPs), have demonstrated their commitment to CVD
prevention. (The third sector includes voluntary and community groups, social
enterprises, charities, cooperatives and mutual organisations.) For example, many
have established health and wellbeing partnerships. In addition, 5 of the 15 most
popular improvement targets in LSP local area agreements relate directly or
indirectly to CVD prevention. Fifty-one LSPs have also selected national indicator
(NI) 121 (mortality rate from all circulatory diseases for those aged under 75) as
an indicator for the current round of local area agreements, which runs to 2011.
1.64 Only 5 (6.7%) of the 74 green flags awarded to the 152 LSPs in England as part of
their first comprehensive area assessment related to public health (green flags
represent exceptional performance or outstanding improvement); 19 (30.6%) of
the 62 red flags awarded related to public health. Of these, 15 (24.2%) related
directly or indirectly to CVD prevention. (Red flags indicate the need to improve
outcomes.) The first comprehensive area assessment reports were published in
December 2009.
1.65 Local advocacy by 'third sector' groups and organisations, including the voluntary
sector, is an important part of CVD prevention activities. For example, it could
have an impact on planning applications for fast-food outlets.
1.66 Addressing the needs of disadvantaged groups involves working beyond
geographical boundaries with different communities. The leaders of some
communities may be able to deliver CVD prevention programmes effectively.
However, it should not be assumed that all community leaders will be able or
willing to participate, or that it would be appropriate.
Evidence
1.67 Many studies considered in the reviews of effectiveness for this guidance were
carried out some years ago (that is, studies reporting on regional, population-
level programmes). The majority were published before 2000, with a substantial
number published before 1990. This reflects, in part, the decision to include
studies such as the North Karelia and HeartBeat Wales CVD population
programmes which took place in the 1970s and 1980s. The age of the studies
means a number of factors have to be taken into account when considering

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
effectiveness. In particular:
• The risk factor levels for CVD are likely to have changed. For instance, intake
of salt and saturated fat and the prevalence of smoking may have fallen,
while a sedentary lifestyle and rates of obesity may have increased.
• The political and cultural environments which potentially influence the
effectiveness of interventions may have changed substantially.
1.68 A number of issues have to be taken into account when considering evidence of
the effectiveness of population-level interventions:
• Changes may have come about inadvertently, for instance, as a result of a
change in agriculture practice following economic developments. Any
evaluation of such changes is likely to have been carried out after the event,
using proxy data.
• It is often difficult to find a suitable control population where conditions are
relatively similar to those in the intervention group. Where a control group is
used, there is often contamination between the two groups which can lead to
an underestimation of any beneficial effects.
• It is ethically wrong, and practically impossible, to randomly allocate country-
wide populations to controlled trials. The best evidence available has to be
gleaned from other research designs, in particular, natural experiments,
epidemiological models and cost effectiveness and cost–benefit analyses.
1.69 The potential effect of any intervention may change according to the initial level
of risk. For instance, it may be easier to reduce salt consumption among a
population with a high intake than among a population where intakes of salt are
lower. However, epidemiological modelling suggests that substantial reductions in
CVD rates can be achieved by reducing the major risk factors as much as
possible. This is the case even in countries where CVD mortality rates are already
relatively low, such as Italy (Palmieri et al. 2009).
1.70 The economic modelling used for this guidance was based on conservative
assumptions. Nevertheless, it suggested that the recommended population-
based approaches are likely to be consistently cost saving (see considerations
1.33 and 1.45 and appendix C).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Interpreting the evidence
1.71 The PDG recognised that empirical data alone, even from the best conducted
investigation, seldom provides a sufficient or complete basis for making
recommendations. Rather, it requires interpretation and analysis. Therefore, the
PDG developed its recommendations using the best available empirical data and
inductive and deductive reasoning, using prior knowledge and understanding and
existing models and theories. The development of policy to reduce mortality and
morbidity from CVD flow from these inductive and deductive interpretations.
1.72 The PDG acknowledged that the traditional hierarchy of evidence does not
resolve all the problems associated with empirical data. For example, while it
explicates the degree of bias attributable to poor internal validity, it does not
answer it completely. Nor does it deal with external validity, that is, the degree to
which findings are transferable to other experimental settings or to practice. The
PDG therefore, took a broad approach to the evidence available to it.
Other issues
1.73 Many of the risk factors that the PDG considered are also associated with other
health-related conditions including some common cancers, chronic respiratory
disease, obesity, diabetes, kidney disease and mental wellbeing. The strategies
discussed in this guidance are likely to help prevent some of these other health
conditions. (Certainly, they are not likely to increase the risk of any common
chronic diseases.) However, it was not possible to consider each of these other
health conditions in detail.
1.74 Daily consumption of products containing plant sterols and stanols may reduce
blood cholesterol by about 10%, and so may reduce CVD mortality substantially.
However, it was not clear how a recommendation on their use might impact on
inequalities in health. The PDG believes this issue deserves further attention.
1.75 Agricultural and transport policy and practice (and associated issues) has a
powerful impact on people's diet and physical activity levels. It also has an impact
on climate change and sustainable development (which, in turn, can affect
health). An analysis of transport patterns in London and how they could be

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
changed indicates the extent of this synergy (Woodcock et al. 2009). One
scenario described a 'sustainable transport future' featuring more physically
active travel and low-emission vehicles to cut CO2 emissions by three-fifths. The
report points out that physically active travel could bring substantial benefits: the
incidence of heart disease and stroke could fall by 10% to 20%, with reductions in
breast cancer (12% to 13%), dementia (8%) and depression (5%). Reductions in air
pollution would bring additional health benefits.
1.76 Agriculture and food production account for 10% to 12% of greenhouse gas
emissions (Friel et al. 2009). Livestock farming is responsible for four-fifths of
these emissions (including methane). A 30% fall in adult consumption of
saturated fat from animal sources (and an associated fall in livestock-related
greenhouse gas emissions) would reduce heart disease by around 15% in the UK.
If additional, positive effects are taken into account (such as a reduction in the
prevalence of obesity and diet-related cancers) the health gains might been even
more substantial.
1.77 Monitoring is crucial. The PDG commended the regular Food Standards Agency/
Department of Health-sponsored surveys. These include the National diet and
nutrition survey (NDNS) and the Low income diet and nutrition survey (LIDNS).

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Recommendations for research
The Programme Development Group (PDG) recommends that the following research
questions should be addressed. It notes that 'effectiveness' in this context relates not only
to the size of the effect, but also to cost effectiveness rapidity and duration of effect. It
also takes into account any harmful or negative side effects.
1 Marketing bans in other countries
What has been the impact of marketing bans on foods high in fat, sugar or salt in Norway,
Sweden, Romania and Quebec? What lessons can the UK learn?
2 Inequalities and their contribution
How do inequalities contribute to:
• the consumption of trans fats, poly-unsaturated and mono-unsaturated fats, fresh
fruit and vegetables and stanols?
• variations in physical activity levels among different population groups?
3 Widening health inequalities
CVD prevention aimed at individuals tends to widen health inequalities. Is there any
effective way to ameliorate this? Conversely, is there any further empirical evidence that
population-wide policy interventions or CVD preventive strategies narrow the inequalities
gap?
4 Food taxes and subsidies
What impact would food taxes and subsidies, particularly in relation to salt, saturated fats
and fruit and vegetable consumption, have on CVD risk and health inequalities?

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
5 Natural experiments
Could 'natural' experiments aid understanding of the impact that 'upstream' factors such
as the social, economic and physical environment have on the incidence and rates of
cardiovascular disease (CVD)? How could CVD modelling be developed in the UK,
particularly to examine health inequalities?
6 Regular daily intake of 2.5 g of stanols or sterols
What effect would a regular daily intake of 2.5 g of stanols or sterols have on the incidence
of cardiac and stroke events? How can we best evaluate stanols in terms of their
acceptability, affordability, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and impact on health
inequalities?
More detail on the gaps in the evidence identified during development of this guidance is
provided in appendix D.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
References
Abelson P (2003) Returns on investment in public health. Canberra: Department of Health
and Ageing
Action on Smoking and Health (2008) Beyond smoking kills. London: Action on Smoking
and Health
Allender S, Peto V, Scarborough P et al. (2007) Coronary heart disease statistics 2007
edition. London: British Heart Foundation
American Heart Association (2005) Dietary recommendations for children and
adolescents. A guide for practitioners: consensus statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 112: 2061–75
Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E et al. (1997) A clinical trial of the effects of dietary
patterns on blood pressure. New England Journal of Medicine 336: 1117–24
Appel LJ, Anderson CAM (2010) Compelling evidence for public health action to reduce
salt intake. New England Journal of Medicine 362: 650–2
Aspelund T, Gudnason V, Magnusdottir BT et al. (2009) Why have coronary heart disease
mortality rates in Iceland plummeted between 1981 and 2006? Circulation 119: e348
Barrett-Connor E, Cohn BA, Wingard DL et al. (1991) Why is diabetes mellitus a stronger
risk factor for fatal ischaemic heart disease in women than in men? The Rancho Bernardo
Study. Journal of the American Medical Association 265: 627–31
Blas E, Gilson L, Kelly MP et al. (2008) Addressing social determinants of health inequities:
what can the state and civil society do? The Lancet 372: 1684–9
British Heart Foundation (2009a) What is cardiovascular disease? What is coronary heart
disease? What is stroke?
British Heart Foundation (2009b) Heartstats: Morbidity from CVD.
British Heart Foundation (2009c) Heartstats: Numbers dying from CVD and CHD

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Brownell KD, Warner KE (2009) The perils of ignoring history: big tobacco played dirty and
millions died. How similar is big food? The Milbank Quarterly 87 (1): 259–94
Blas E, Gilson L, Kelly MP et al. (2008) Addressing social determinants of health inequities:
what can the state and civil society do? The Lancet 372: 1684–89
Cabinet Office (2008) Food matters: towards a strategy for the 21st century. London:
Cabinet Office
Capewell S, O'Flaherty M (2008) What explains declining coronary mortality? Lessons and
warnings. Heart 94: 1105–8
Cardio and Vascular Coalition (2009) Destination 2020: a plan for cardiac and vascular
health. London: British Heart Foundation
Catford J (2009) Advancing the 'science of delivery' of health promotion: not just the
'science of discovery'. Health Promotion International 24 (1): 1–5
Cooney MT, Dudina A, Winchup P et al. (2009) Re-evaluating the Rose approach:
comparative benefits of the population and high-risk preventive strategies. European
Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation 16 (5): 541–9
Critchley J, Liu J, Zhao D et al. (2004) Explaining the increase in coronary heart disease
mortality in Beijing between 1984 and 1999. Circulation 110: 1236–44
de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL et al. (1999) Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors
and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction. Final report from
the Lyon diet health study. Circulation 99: 779–85
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2010) Food 2030. London:
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Department for Transport (2010) Active travel strategy. London: Department for Transport
Department of Health (2003) Tackling health inequalities: a programme for action. London:
Department of Health
Department of Health (2004) Choosing health: making healthy choices easier. London:

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Department of Health
Department of Health (2005a) Delivering choosing health: making healthier choices easier.
London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2005b) Tackling health inequalities: what works. London:
Department of Health
Department of Health (2006a) Health challenge England – next steps for choosing health.
London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2006b) Our health, our care, our say. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2006c) The NHS in England: the operating framework for 2006/7.
London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2007a) Commissioning framework for health and well-being.
London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2007b) National stroke strategy. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2007c) The NHS in England: the operating framework for 2008/9.
London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2008a) Tackling health inequalities: 2007 status report on the
programme for action. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2008b) Health inequalities: progress and next steps. London:
Department of Health
Department of Health (2008c) Healthy weight, healthy lives: a cross-government strategy
for England. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2008d) Putting prevention first – vascular checks: risk assessment
and management. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2009a) Be active be healthy. A plan for getting the nation moving.
London: Department of Health

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Department of Health (2009b) NHS 2010 – 2015: from good to great. Preventative, people-
centred, productive. London: Department of Health
Department of Health (2010) A smokefree future: a comprehensive tobacco control
strategy for England. London: Department of Health
Dowse GK, Gareeboo H, Alberti KG, et al. (1995) Changes in population cholesterol
concentrations and other cardiovascular risk factor levels after five years of the non-
communicable disease intervention programme in Mauritius. BMJ 311: 1255–9
Emberson J, Whincup P, Morris R et al. (2004) Evaluating the impact of population and
high-risk strategies for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. European Heart
Journal 25 (6): 484–491
Exworthy M, Berney L, Powell M (2002) How great expectations in Westminster may be
dashed locally: the local implementation of national policy on health inequalities. Policy
and Politics (30) 1: 79–96
Food Standards Agency (2007) Eatwell plate.
Food Standards Agency (2009) Consultation on the FSA strategy 2010–2015. London:
Food Standards Agency
Ford ES, Capewell S (2007) Coronary heart disease mortality among young adults in the
US from 1980 through 2002. Concealed leveling of mortality rates. Journal of the American
College of Cardiology (50): 2128–32
Friel S, Dangour A, Garnett T et al. (2009) Public health benefits of strategies to reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions: food and agriculture. Lancet 374 (9705): 2016–25
Fung TT, Rimm EB, Spiegelman D et al. (2001) Association between dietary patterns and
plasma biomarkers of obesity and cardiovascular disease risk. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 73: 61–7
Harder T, Bergmann R, Kallischnigg G et al. (2005) Duration of breastfeeding and risk of
overweight: a meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology 162: 397–403
He FJ, Marrero NM, MacGregor GA (2008) Salt and blood pressure in children and

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
adolescents. Journal of Human Hypertension 22: 4–11
Heidemann C, Schulze MB, Franco OH et al. (2008) Dietary patterns and risk of mortality
from cardiovascular disease, cancer and all causes in a prospective cohort of women.
Circulation 118: 230–7
HM Government; Communities and Local Government (2008) Creating strong, safe and
prosperous communities. Statutory guidance. London: Community and Local Government
Publications
Hu FB (2008) Globalization of food patterns and cardiovascular disease risk. Circulation
118: 1913–4
Kelly MP, Stewart E, Morgan A et al. (2009a) A conceptual framework for public health:
NICE's emerging approach. Public Health 123: e14–20
Kelly B, Hughes C, Chapman K et al. (2009b) Consumer testing of the acceptability and
effectiveness of front-of-pack food labelling systems for the Australian grocery market.
Health Promotion International 24 (2): 120–29
Kingdon J (1995) Agendas, alternatives and public policy. Boston: Little Brown
Laatikainen T, Critchley J, Vartiainen E et al. (2005) Explaining the decline in coronary
heart disease mortality in Finland between 1982 and 1997. American Journal of
Epidemiology 162 (8): 764–73
Labarthe D (1999) Prevention of cardiovascular risk factors in the first place. Preventive
Medicine 29 (6): S72–8
Lloyd Williams F, Mwatsama M, Birt C et al. (2008) Estimating the cardiovascular mortality
burden attributable to the European Common Agricultural Policy on dietary saturated fats.
Geneva: World Health Organization
Lock K, Pomerleau J (2005) Fruit and vegetable policy in the European Union: its effect on
cardiovascular disease. Brussels: European Health Network
Lopez-Garcia E, Schulze MB, Fung TT et al. (2004) Major dietary patterns are related to
plasma concentrations of markers of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. American

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80: 1029–35
Ludwig DE, Brownell KD (2009) The case of restaurant calorie labeling regulations. Journal
of the American Medical Association (4): 434–5
Luengo-Fernandez R, Leal J, Gray A et al. (2006) Cost of cardiovascular diseases in the
United Kingdom. Heart 92: 1384–9
Mann J, Appleby P, Kay T et al. (2009) Dietary determinants of ischaemic heart disease in
health conscious individuals. Heart 78: 450-5
Marmot M (2010) Fair society, healthy lives: strategic review of health inequalities in
England post 2010
Martin RM, Gunnell D, Davey Smith G (2005) Breastfeeding in infancy and blood pressure
in later life: systematic review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology 161:
15–26
National Heart Forum (2003) A lifecourse approach to coronary heart disease prevention,
scientific and policy review. London: The Stationery Office
National Heart Forum (2010) A prediction of obesity trends for adults and their associated
diseases: analysis from the Health Survey for England 1993–2007
O'Flaherty M, Bishop J, McLaughlin T et al. (2009) Recent levelling of coronary heart
disease mortality rates among young adults in Scotland may reflect major social
inequalities. BMJ 339: b2613
Office of Communications (2006) Annex 7 – impact assessment. Annex to consultation on
television advertising of food and drink to children
Osler M, Heitmann BL, Gerdes LU et al. (2001) Dietary patterns and mortality in Danish
men and women: a prospective observational study. British Journal of Nutrition 85: 219–25
Owen CG, Martin RM, Whincup PH et al. (2006) Does breastfeeding influence risk of type 2
diabetes in later life? A quantitative analysis of published evidence. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 84: 1043–54

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Owen CG, Whincup PH, Kaye SJ et al. (2008) Does initial breastfeeding lead to lower blood
cholesterol in adult life? A quantitative review of the evidence. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 88: 305–14
Palmieri L, Bennett K, Giampaoli S et al. (2009) Explaining the decrease in coronary heart
disease mortality in Italy between 1980 and 2000. American Journal of Public Health.
Pawson R (2001) Evidence based policy: 2. The promise of 'realist synthesis'
Rose G (2008) Rose's strategy of preventive medicine. The complete original text.
Commentary by Khaw KT, Marmot M. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Royal College of Physicians (2007) Harm reduction in nicotine addiction. Helping people
who can't quit: a report by the Tobacco Advisory Group of the Royal College of Physicians.
London: Royal College of Physicians
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2003) Salt and health
Strategy Unit (2008) Food matters. Towards a strategy for the 21st Century. London:
Cabinet Office
Strazzullo P, D'Elia L, Kandala N et al. (2009) Salt intake, stroke, and cardiovascular
disease: meta-analysis of prospective studies. BMJ 339: 4567
Swann C, Owen L, Carmona C et al. (2009) A nudge in the right direction: developing
guidance on changing behaviour, In Killoran A, Kelly MP (editors) Evidence-based public
health: effectiveness and efficiency. Oxford : Oxford University Press
Swinburn B, Sacks G, Lobstein T et al. (2007) The 'Sydney principles' for reducing the
commercial promotion of foods and beverages to children. Public Health Nutrition: 11 (9):
881–6
Trust for America's Health (2008) Prevention for a healthier America: investments in
disease prevention yield significant savings, stronger communities
Uauy R, Aro A, Clark R et al. (2009) WHO scientific update on trans fatty acids: summary
and conclusions. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (63): 68–75

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Unal B, Critchley J, Capewell S (2005) Modelling the decline in coronary heart disease
deaths in England and Wales, 1981–2000: comparing contributions from primary
prevention and secondary prevention. BMJ 331: 614–5
Wanless D (2004) Securing good health for the whole population. London: HM Treasury
Wilson A, Siskind V (1995) Coronary heart disease mortality in Australia: is mortality
starting to increase among young men? International Journal of Epidemiology (24): 678-84
Woodcock J, Edwards P, Tonne C et al. (2009) Public health benefits of strategies to
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: urban land transport. Lancet 374 (9705): 1930–43
World Health Organization (2003) Framework convention on tobacco control
World Health Organization (2007) Prevention of CVD: guidelines for assessment and
management of total cardiovascular risk. Geneva: World Health Organization
Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ôunpuu T et al. (2004) Effect of potentially modifiable risk factors
associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): case-
control study. The Lancet 364: 937–52
Zatonski WA, Willett W (2005) Changes in dietary fat and declining coronary heart disease
in Poland: population based study. BMJ 331: 187–9

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Appendix A: Membership of the
Programme Development Group (PDG),
the NICE project team and external
contractors
Programme Development Group
PDG membership is multidisciplinary, comprising public health practitioners, clinicians
(both specialists and generalists), local authority officers, teachers, social care
professionals, representatives of the public, patients, carers, academics and technical
experts as follows.
Pamela Ashton Community Member
Andrew Briggs Professor of Health Policy and Economic Evaluation, University of Glasgow
Simon Capewell (Vice Chair) Professor of Clinical Epidemiology, University of Liverpool;
Honorary Consultant in Public Health, Liverpool PCTs
Francesco Cappuccio Chair of Cardiovascular Medicine and Epidemiology, Clinical
Sciences Research Institute, University of Warwick Medical School; Honorary Consultant
Physician, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS Trust, Coventry
Martin Caraher Professor in Food and Health Policy, Centre for Food Policy, City University
Charlie Foster Senior Researcher, British Heart Foundation Health Promotion Research
Group, University of Oxford
Paramjit Gill GP and Clinical Reader in Primary Care Research, Primary Care Clinical
Sciences, University of Birmingham; Honorary Consultant in Primary Care, Heart of
Birmingham Teaching PCT
Robin Ireland Chief Executive, Heart of Mersey

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Paul Lincoln Chief Executive, National Heart Forum
Klim McPherson (Chair) Visiting Professor of Public Health Epidemiology, University of
Oxford
Madeleine Murtagh Reader, Applied Social Science in Public Health and Social Care,
Medical and Social Care Education, University of Leicester
Margaret O'Mara Community Member (attended meetings 1 to 3 only)
Kiran Patel Consultant Cardiologist and Honorary Senior Lecturer in Cardiovascular
Medicine, University of Birmingham, Sandwell and West Birmingham NHS Trust
Suzannah Power Community Member
Ian Reekie Community Member
Sian Robinson Principal Research Fellow, Medical Research Council Epidemiology
Resource Centre, University of Southampton
John Soady Public Health Principal, Directorate of Public Health, NHS Sheffield
Margaret Thorogood Professor of Epidemiology, Warwick Medical School, University of
Warwick
Valerie Woodward Senior Lecturer, University of Wolverhampton
NICE project team
Mike Kelly CPHE Director
Jane Huntley Associate Director
Catherine Swann Associate Director
Hugo Crombie Lead Analyst
Andrew Hoy Analyst

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Patti White Analyst
Susan Murray Analyst
Lorraine Taylor Analyst
Caroline Mulvihill Analyst
Bhash Naidoo Technical Adviser Health Economics
Alastair Fischer Technical Adviser Health Economics
Sue Jelley Senior Editor
Alison Lake Editor
External contractors
Evidence reviews
Review 1: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1; phase 1)
was carried out by the West Midlands Health Technology Assessment Collaboration
(WMHTAC), University of Birmingham. The principal authors were: Mary Pennant, Wendy
Greenheld, Anne Fry-Smith, Sue Bayliss, Clare Davenport and Chris Hyde.
Review 2: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1; phase 2)
was carried out by WMHTAC, University of Birmingham. The principal authors were: Mary
Pennant, Wendy Greenheld, Anne Fry-Smith, Sue Bayliss, Clare Davenport and Chris Hyde.
Review 3: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1; phase 3)
was carried out by WMHTAC, University of Birmingham. The principal authors were: Mary
Pennant, Wendy Greenheld, Anne Fry-Smith, Sue Bayliss, Clare Davenport and Chris Hyde.
Review 4: Barriers to, and facilitators for, the effectiveness of multiple risk factor
programmes aimed at reducing cardiovascular disease within a given population: a
systematic review of qualitative research was carried out by the Peninsula Technology
Assessment Group at the Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter and Plymouth.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
The principal authors were: Ruth Garside, Mark Pearson, Kate Ashton, Tiffany Moxham and
Rob Anderson.
Primary research
Review 5: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors to
prevent cardiovascular disease: A qualitative study into how and why some programmes
are more successful than others was carried out by the Peninsula Technology Assessment
Group at the Peninsula Medical School, Universities of Exeter and Plymouth. The principal
authors were: Ruth Garside, Mark Pearson, Tiffany Moxham, and Rob Anderson.
Economic analysis
Review 6: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1; cost-
effectiveness) was carried out by WMHTAC, University of Birmingham. The principal
authors were: Lazaros Andronis, Pelham Barton, Sue Bayliss and Chris Hyde.
Modelling report: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level: modelling
strategies for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease was carried out by WMHTAC,
University of Birmingham. The principal authors were: Pelham Barton and Lazaros
Andronis.
Fieldwork
Fieldwork on prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level was carried out by
Greenstreet Berman.
Expert testimony
Report 1: The effectiveness of physical activity promotion interventions was carried out by
Charlie Foster and Nick Cavill, British Heart Foundation Health Promotion Research Group.
Report 2: Health policy analysis was carried out by Mark Exworthy, School of
Management, Royal Holloway University of London.
Report 3: Expert testimony on salt and cardiovascular disease was carried out by
Francesco Cappuccio, Clinical Sciences Research Institute, University of Warwick Medical

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
School.
Report 4: The relationship between commercial interests and risk of cardiovascular
disease was carried out by Jane Landon, National Heart Forum.
Report 5: Regional development of a population-based collaborative CVD prevention
strategy: the experience of NHS West Midlands was carried out by Kiran Patel, University
of Birmingham and West Midlands Strategic Health Authority.
Report 6: NICE guidance on the prevention of CVD at population level: evidence from the
Co-operative Group was carried out by Cathryn Higgs, the Co-operative Group.
Report 7: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors to
prevent cardiovascular disease (CVD): addendum to qualitative study produced by
Peninsula Technology Assessment Group for NICE: CVD programme – Heart of Mersey
(HoM) was carried out by Robin Ireland, Heart of Mersey.
Report 8: Expert testimony paper on the independent evaluation of 'have a heart Paisley'
phase one (Scotland's national CHD prevention demonstration project) was carried out by
Avril Blamey, Avril Blamey and Associates.
Report 9: Expert testimony on the public health harm caused by industrially produced
trans fatty acids and actions to reduce and eliminate them from the food system in the UK
was carried out by Paul Lincoln, National Heart Forum.
Report 10: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at a population level: evidence on
interventions to address dietary fats was carried out by Modi Mwatsama, Heart of Mersey.
Report 11: CVD risk factors: paradigms and pathways was carried out by Simon Capewell,
University of Liverpool.
Report 12: CVD prevention in populations: lessons from other countries was carried out by
Simon Capewell, University of Liverpool.
Report 13: Will CVD prevention widen health inequalities? was carried out by Simon
Capewell, University of Liverpool.
Report 14: Food manufacturer's perspective was carried out by Frances Swallow and

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Nicola Currie, Greencore.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Appendix B: Summary of the methods
used to develop this guidance
Introduction
The reviews, expert reports and economic analysis include full details of the methods used
to select the evidence (including search strategies), assess its quality and summarise it.
The minutes of the PDG meetings provide further detail about the Group's interpretation of
the evidence and development of the recommendations.
All supporting documents are listed in appendix E.
Key questions
The key questions were established as part of the scope. They formed the starting point
for the reviews of evidence and were used by the PDG to help develop the
recommendations.
The overarching questions were:
• Which multiple risk-factor interventions are effective and cost effective in preventing
the onset of cardiovascular disease (CVD) within a given population (primary
prevention)?
• How does effectiveness and cost effectiveness vary between different population
groups?
The subsidiary question was:
What barriers and facilitators influence the effectiveness of multiple risk-factor
programmes aimed at reducing CVD (or the risk factors associated with CVD) among a
given population (including subgroups experiencing health inequalities, where the data
allows)?

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
These questions were made more specific for each review (see reviews for further details).
Single risk factors were considered using expert testimony. See appendix C.
Reviewing the evidence
Three reviews of effectiveness (reviews 1,2 and 3), one qualitative review (review 4), one
primary study of barriers and facilitators (review 5) and one review of cost effectiveness
(review 6) were conducted.
Identifying the evidence
The following databases were searched for randomised controlled trials (RCTs); controlled
before-and-after trials; cohort studies; case–control studies; before-and-after studies; and
interrupted time series (from 1970 onwards):
• ASSIA (Applied Social Science Index and Abstracts)
• CINAHL (Cumulative Index of Nursing and Allied Health Literature)
• Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR)
• Cochrane Library (Wiley)
• Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE)
• DH-Data
• EMBASE
• Health Management Information Service (HELMIS)
• Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
• HMIC (Health Management Information Consortium)
• King's Fund Database
• MEDLINE
• MEDLINE In Process

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• PsycINFO
The following websites were also searched:
• Centre for the Evaluation of Public Health Interventions, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine
• Cochrane Public Health Group
• Health evidence
• The Campbell Collaboration
• The Evidence for Policy and Practice Information and Coordinating Centre
Further details of the databases, search terms and strategies used are included in the
review reports.
Selection criteria
Studies were included in the effectiveness reviews if they:
• Involved a population at least the size of one covered by a UK primary care trust.
• Were based in an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
country, another developed country or within a World Health Organization region.
• Included primary prevention strategies to tackle at least two of the key risk factors for
CVD.
Studies were excluded if they were:
• Confined to populations clinically diagnosed as being at high risk of CVD or diagnosed
with CVD.
• Published before 1970.
• Not published in English.
Quality appraisal
Included papers were assessed for methodological rigour and quality using the NICE

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
methodology checklist, as set out in the NICE technical manual 'Methods for the
development of NICE public health guidance'. Each study was graded (++, +, –) to reflect
the risk of potential bias arising from its design and execution.
Study quality
++ All or most of the checklist criteria have been fulfilled. Where they have not been
fulfilled, the conclusions are very unlikely to alter.
+ Some of the checklist criteria have been fulfilled. Those criteria that have not been
fulfilled or not adequately described are unlikely to alter the conclusions.
– Few or no checklist criteria have been fulfilled. The conclusions of the study are likely or
very likely to alter.
Economic analysis
The economic analysis consisted of a review of economic evaluations (review 6) and a
cost effectiveness analysis.
Review of economic evaluations
The same protocol was used to conduct the literature reviews for all phases of the review.
In a minor departure from the protocol, the list of included study designs was extended to
include cost-consequences.
The following databases were searched from 1970 to August 2008:
• ECONLIT
• EMBASE
• MEDLINE
• NHS EED database (Cochrane Library, Wiley).
The search was limited to articles published from 1970 onwards and in the English
language.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
In addition to the general bibliographic database searches, specific searches were
conducted for each programme found during the general searches to ensure all published
evaluations, particularly economic evaluations, were identified.
Study quality was assessed using an evidence form based on the 'Methods for the
development of NICE public health guidance' (second edition 2009) and adapted to reflect
the parameters of this review. It was supplemented with questions from the Drummond
checklist (Drummond MF [1996] Guidelines for authors and peer reviewers of economic
submissions to the BMJ. London: BMJ).
The selection criteria were the same as for the effectiveness reviews (see pages 53 to 54).
The following study types were included: cost–benefit, cost-effectiveness and cost–utility
analyses.
Modelling
An economic model was constructed to incorporate data from the reviews of effectiveness
and cost effectiveness. The results are reported in Prevention of cardiovascular disease at
population level: modelling strategies for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Fieldwork
Fieldwork was carried out to evaluate how relevant and useful NICE's recommendations
are for practitioners and how feasible it would be to put them into practice. It was
conducted with practitioners and commissioners who are involved in activities relevant to
cardiovascular disease. They included those working in the food industry (such as food
retailers, food producers and trade associations), local planning departments, local
authority catering representatives and representatives from the NHS and PCTs.
The fieldwork comprised:
• Eight half-day workshops.
• Nine case studies (interviews involving practitioners, commissioners and
professionals). Each reviewed recommendations made in the following specific areas:
－ health impact assessments
－ CVD prevention programmes (two case studies)

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
－ take-away planning
－ training caterers
－ public sector food provision
－ physically active travel
－ the dairy industry
－ reformulation of food.
• Telephone interviews covering the following topics: mass media, government
departments, and key food industry producers.
The studies were commissioned to ensure there was ample geographical coverage. The
main issues arising from these studies are set out in appendix C under fieldwork findings.
See the full fieldwork report on prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level.
How the PDG formulated the recommendations
At its meetings between September 2008 and July 2009, the PDG considered the
evidence of effectiveness, expert reports and cost effectiveness to determine:
• whether there was sufficient evidence (in terms of strength and applicability) to form a
judgement
• where relevant, whether (on balance) the evidence demonstrates that the intervention
or programme/activity can be effective or is inconclusive
• where relevant, the typical size of effect (where there is one)
• Whether the evidence is applicable to the target groups and context covered by the
guidance.
The PDG developed draft recommendations through informal consensus, based on the
following criteria:
• Strength (type, quality quantity and consistency) of the evidence.
• The applicability of the evidence to the populations/settings referred to in the scope.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Effect size and potential impact on the target population's health.
• Impact on inequalities in health between different groups of the population.
• Equality and diversity legislation.
• Ethical issues and social value judgements.
• Cost effectiveness (for the NHS and other public sector organisations).
• Balance of harms and benefits.
• Ease of implementation and any anticipated changes in practice.
Where possible, recommendations were linked to evidence statements (see appendix C).
Where a recommendation was inferred from the evidence, this was indicated by the
reference 'IDE' (inference derived from the evidence).
The draft guidance, including the recommendations, was released for consultation in
October 2009. At its meeting in December 2009, the PDG amended the guidance in light
of comments from stakeholders and experts and the fieldwork. The guidance was signed
off by the NICE Guidance Executive in May 2010.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Appendix C: The evidence
This appendix lists the evidence statements from four reviews, a cost-effectiveness
review and a primary research study provided by external contractors (see appendix A)
and links them to the relevant recommendations. (See appendix B for the key to quality
assessments.)
The evidence statements are presented here without references, these can be found in
the full reviews (see appendix E).
The appendix also sets out a brief summary of findings from the economic analysis.
The 4 reviews (reviews 1 to 4), the primary research study (review 5) and the cost-
effectiveness review (review 6) are:
• Evidence reviews:
－ Review 1: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 1)
－ Review 2: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 2)
－ Review 3: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 3)
－ Review 4: Barriers to, and facilitators for, multiple risk factor programmes aimed at
reducing cardiovascular disease within a given population: a systematic review of
qualitative research
• Primary research:
－ Review 5: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors
to prevent cardiovascular disease: A qualitative study into how and why some
programmes are more successful than others
• Cost-effectiveness review:
－ Review 6: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
cost-effectiveness)
Evidence statement R3.E1a indicates that the linked statement is numbered E1a in review
3. Evidence statement R5.12 indicates that the linked statement is numbered 12 in the
primary research study (review 5). Evidence statement ER1 indicates that the linked
statement is from expert report 1 (see additional evidence). Evidence statement CE1
indicates that the linked statement is numbered 1 in the cost-effectiveness review (review
6). '
The reviews, economic analysis and additional evidence are available. Where a
recommendation is not directly taken from the evidence statements, but is inferred from
the evidence, this is indicated by IDE (inference derived from the evidence).
Where the PDG has considered other evidence, it is linked to the appropriate
recommendation below. It is also listed in the additional evidence section of this appendix.
This includes evidence used to develop other NICE guidelines and guidance.
Recommendation 1: evidence statement R3.E1m; additional evidence ER3
Recommendation 2: evidence statements R3.E1b; R3E1h; R3.E1i; R3.E1j; R3.E1k; additional
evidence ER10
Recommendation 3: additional evidence ER9; ER10
Recommendation 4: additional evidence ER4; ER6; CG43 (1)
Recommendation 5: additional evidence ER4
Recommendation 6: additional evidence ER3; ER4; ER6; CG43 (2)
Recommendation 7: additional evidence ER1; ER10; ER13
Recommendation 8: additional evidence ER10; ER13
Recommendation 9: additional evidence ER1; CG43 (3)
Recommendation 10: additional evidence CG43 (4)
Recommendation 11: evidence statements R4.18a; R4.18b

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Recommendation 12: IDE
Recommendation 13: evidence statements R3.E2a–f, R4.2a–c, R4.17a–d, R4.18a–c, R4.19a,
R4.20a, R4.21a–c, R4.22a, R4.23a–b, R4.24a–d, R4.25a–d, R4.26a–d, R5.2
Recommendation 14: evidence statements R3.E1a–o, R3.E2a–f, R3.E3a–c, R4.14a–b, R5.5,
R5.7, R5.10, CE 1–9; additional evidence ER 7, ER 8, ER 13
Recommendation 15: evidence statements R4.3a, R4.3b, R4.10a–d, R4.11a, R4. 11b, R4.12a,
R4.13a–d, R4.15a, R4.15b, R5.2, R5.4, R5.6, R5.7
Recommendation 16: evidence statements R4.1b, R4.7c, R4.10d, R5.2, R5.3
Recommendation 17: evidence statements R4.16a–c, R5.12
Recommendation 18: evidence statements R3.E1n, R3.E3c, R4.4a, R4.9f, R4.18a, R4.18c;
additional evidence ER 1
Recommendation 19: evidence statements R3.E5c, R4.18a–c; additional evidence ER 4
Recommendation 20: evidence statements R3.E1a–m, R3.E3c, R4.4a, R4.9e, R4.18a,
R4.18b, R4.25e; additional evidence ER 3, ER 9, ER 10
Recommendation 21: evidence statements R4.1b, R4.3a, R4.3b, R4.7a–c, R4.8a–d,
R4.16a–c, R4.17a–d, R5.3, R5.7, R5.8, R5.9, R5.11, R5.12; additional evidence ER 5, ER 7, ER 8
Recommendation 22: evidence statements R4.3a, R4.18a, R4.18c, R5.10; additional
evidence ER 1, ER 5, ER 7, ER 8, ER 12, IDE
Recommendation 23: evidence statements R3.E3a, R3.E3c, R4.18a, R4.18b; additional
evidence ER 3, ER 4, ER 9, ER 10
Recommendation 24: evidence statements R4.9e; additional evidence ER 3, ER 9, ER 10
In addition, the approach taken in recommendations 1 to 12 is supported by the following
evidence statements: R4.3a, R4.3b, R4.4a, R4.18a, R418b, R418c, R5.9 and additional
evidence ER10, ER11, ER12, ER13.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statements
Please note that the wording of some evidence statements has been altered slightly from
those in the evidence reviews to make them more consistent with each other and NICE's
standard house style.
Evidence statement R3.E1a
CVD mortality and morbidity: Limited evidence from 3 out of 38 programme evaluations
using different summary effect measures demonstrate a mixed effect of multiple risk
factor interventions (MRFI) on CVD mortality (the majority of programmes were beneficial)
with two controlled before-and-after (CBA) studies demonstrating a net decrease in CVD
mortality and one randomised controlled trial (RCT) demonstrating no net change. Limited
evidence from 4 out of 38 programme evaluations, using different summary effect
measures, demonstrate a mixed effect of MRFI on CVD morbidity (the majority
disbeneficial) with one CBA study and one RCT demonstrating a net increase in morbidity
and one RCT demonstrating no net change in morbidity. The effect of one programme on
morbidity and mortality is unclear.
Evidence statement R3.E1b
Blood cholesterol: A large body of evidence from 15 CBA studies and 5 RCTs demonstrates
a mixed direction of effect (majority of programmes beneficial) of MRFI programmes on
blood cholesterol. Fourteen studies (nine CBA and five RCTs) demonstrate a beneficial net
effect. Four CBA studies demonstrate no net effect or inconclusive net effects and two
CBA studies demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The most optimistic result was from a
CBA study, reporting a 0.7mmol/l net reduction in blood cholesterol. The least optimistic
result was from a CBA study, reporting a +0.5mmol/l net increase in blood cholesterol.
Evidence statement R3.E1c
Diastolic and systolic blood pressure: A large body of evidence demonstrates a mixed
direction of effect (majority of programmes beneficial) in favour of MRFI programmes on
diastolic and systolic blood pressure. Fourteen CBA studies and five RCTs demonstrate a
mixed direction of effect (majority of programmes beneficial) on diastolic blood pressure.
Twelve studies (seven CBA studies and five RCTs) demonstrate a beneficial net effect.
Five CBA studies demonstrate no net effect or inconclusive net effects and two CBA
studies demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The most optimistic result was from a CBA

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
study, reporting a 5.5mmHg net reduction in diastolic blood pressure. The least optimistic
result was from a CBA study, reporting a 6mmHg net increase in diastolic blood pressure.
Fourteen CBA studies and five RCTs demonstrate a mixed effect (majority of programmes
beneficial) on systolic blood pressure. Ten studies (five CBA studies and five RCTs)
demonstrate a beneficial net effect. Five CBA studies demonstrate no net effect or
inconclusive net effects and four CBA studies demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The
most optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting an 11.8 mmHg net reduction in
systolic blood pressure. The least optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a
5mmHg net increase in systolic blood pressure.
Evidence statement R3.E1d
Smoking: A large body of evidence from twenty CBA studies and four RCTs demonstrate a
mixed effect of MRFI on smoking prevalence (the majority of programmes beneficial).
Twelve studies (nine CBA studies and three RCTs) demonstrate a beneficial net effect.
Seven studies (six CBA studies and one RCT) demonstrate no net effect or inconclusive
net effects and five CBA studies demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The most
optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting an 18.6% net reduction in smoking
prevalence. The least optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a 12.8% net
increase in smoking prevalence.
Evidence statement R3.E1e
BMI: A large body of evidence from fourteen CBA studies and three RCTs demonstrate a
mixed effect of MRFI programmes on body mass index (BMI) (the majority of programmes
beneficial). Ten studies (seven CBA studies and three RCTs) demonstrate a beneficial net
effect. Four CBA studies demonstrate no net effect or inconclusive net effects and three
CBA studies demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The most optimistic result was from a
CBA study, reporting a 1.3kg/m2 net reduction in BMI. The least optimistic result was from
a CBA study, reporting a 0.7kg/m2 net increase in BMI.
Evidence statement R3.E1f
Blood glucose: Limited evidence from 3 out of 38 programme evaluations, using different
summary effect measures, demonstrate a mixed effect of MRFI on blood glucose. One RCT
and one CBA study report mixed results: net decreases in men and net increases in
women, whilst one CBA study demonstrates no net effect.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R3.E1g
Triglyceride levels, high-density lipoprotein/low-density lipoprotein (HDL/LDL) ratio or lipid
levels: No evidence has been identified on the effects of MRFI programmes on triglyceride
levels, HDL/LDL ratio or lipid levels.
Evidence statement R3.E1h
Dietary change – low versus high fat spreads: Five CBA studies and one RCT (+)
demonstrate a mixed effect of MRFI programmes on consumption or low versus high fat
spreads (the majority of programmes beneficial). Four studies (three CBA studies and one
RCT) demonstrate a beneficial net effect. One CBA study demonstrates an inconclusive
net effect and one CBA study demonstrates an unfavourable net effect. The most
optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a 24% net reduction in the number of
people with high consumption of fat spread on bread. The least optimistic result was from
a CBA study, reporting a 3.3% net decrease in the use of unsaturated spreading fats.
Evidence statement R3.E1i
Dietary change – vegetable versus animal fats for cooking: Four CBA studies demonstrate
a mixed effect of MRFI programmes on the use of vegetable versus animal fat for cooking
(the majority of programmes beneficial). Three CBA studies demonstrate a beneficial net
effect and one CBA study demonstrates an inconclusive net effect. The most optimistic
result was from a CBA study, reporting a 6% net increase in the use of unsaturated fats for
cooking. The least optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a 2% net decrease in
the use of vegetable fats for cooking.
Evidence statement R3.E1j
Dietary change – low versus high fat milk: Five CBA studies and one RCT (+) demonstrate
a mixed effect of MRFI programmes on the consumption of low- versus high-fat milk (the
majority of programmes beneficial). Three CBA studies and one RCT demonstrate a
beneficial net effect and two CBA studies demonstrate an inconclusive net effect. The
most optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a 9% net increase in the use of low
fat milk in men. The least optimistic result was from a CBA study, reporting a 1% net
decrease in the use of low fat milk in women.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R3.E1k
Dietary change – consumption high fat foods: Six CBA studies demonstrate a mixed effect
of MRFI programmes on the percentage of high-fat foods in the diet (the majority of
programmes beneficial). Three CBA studies demonstrate a beneficial net effect, two CBA
studies demonstrate no net effect or inconclusive net effects and one CBA study
demonstrates a disbeneficial net effect. The most optimistic result was from a CBA study,
reporting a 24% net decrease in saturated fat intake. The least optimistic result was from a
CBA study, reporting a 3.4% net increase in high-fat/junk food consumption.
Evidence statement R3.E1l
Dietary change – consumption of fruit and vegetables and wholemeal bread: Limited
evidence is available on the effects of MRFI programmes on the consumption of fruit and
vegetables and wholemeal bread (the majority of programmes beneficial). Three CBA
studies demonstrate a mixed effect of MRFI programmes on the consumption of fruit and
vegetables. Two CBA studies demonstrate a beneficial net effect and one CBA study
demonstrates an inconclusive net effect. The most optimistic result is from a CBA study,
reporting a 9% net increase in the number of people consuming five portions of fruit and
vegetables per day. The least optimistic result is from a CBA study, reporting a 0.2% net
decrease in fruit consumption. Two CBA studies demonstrate a mixed effect on the
consumption of wholemeal bread. One CBA study demonstrates a beneficial net effect and
one CBA study demonstrates an inconclusive effect. The most optimistic result is from a
CBA study, reporting a 3% increase in children. The least optimistic result is from the same
CBA study, reporting a 0.3% net decrease in adults.
Evidence statement R3.E1m
Dietary change – salt intake: Two CBA studies (one [+] and one [-]) provide mixed results
for the effects of MRFI programmes on salt intake. One CBA study demonstrates a
beneficial net treatment effect and one CBA demonstrates an inconclusive net treatment
effect.
Evidence statement R3.E1n
Physical activity: Evidence from 11 CBA studies and one RCT (+) provide a mixed pattern
for the effect of MRFI programmes on physical activity (the majority of studies are
disbeneficial). Three CBA studies and two RCTs demonstrate a favourable net effect.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Three CBA studies demonstrate inconclusive net effects and four CBA studies
demonstrate a disbeneficial net effect. The most optimistic result is from a CBA study,
reporting an 11.5% net increase in the number of people doing strenuous physical activity
more than three times per week. The least optimistic result is from a CBA study, reporting
a 6% net decrease in the number of people who were physically active.
Evidence statement R3.E1o
Attitudes, knowledge and intentions relating to CVD risk factors: Limited evidence is
available on the effects of MRFI programmes on CVD risk factor attitudes, knowledge and
intention to change. One CBA study and one uncontrolled before-and-after study suggest
beneficial changes in CVD knowledge following MRFI programmes. One of these studies
showed a net increase in the number of individuals intending to lose weight. No evidence
has been identified on the effects of MRFI programmes on CVD risk factor attitudes.
Evidence statement R3.E2a
General: Evidence for variation in effectiveness in subgroups of the population is limited
and inconsistently reported across included programmes. There is no clear pattern with
respect to gender, age, ethnicity or measures of deprivation which may be the result of the
limited information available, confounding and selective reporting.
Evidence statement R3.E2b
Ethnicity: Three programmes report the results of subgroup analysis of effectiveness
according to ethnicity. One uncontrolled before-and-after study reports lower
effectiveness in ethnic minorities in acquisition of CVD knowledge. One CBA study reports
lower effectiveness in ethnic minority groups for reducing smoking prevalence, reducing
BMI and increasing fruit and vegetable intake and one CBA study reports no difference in
effectiveness according to ethnic group.
Evidence statement R3.E2c
Age: Six programmes report results of subgroup analysis according to age. Two
uncontrolled before-and-after studies report a reduction in effectiveness in acquisition of
CVD knowledge in younger participants and one uncontrolled before-and-after study
reports a reduction in effectiveness in reducing salt intake in younger participants. One
CBA study reports a reduction in effectiveness in promoting CVD awareness in older

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
participants. Two CBA studies report no differences in effectiveness according to age.
Evidence statement R3.E2d
Gender: Seven programmes report results of subgroup analysis according to gender. Four
programmes report a reduction in effectiveness in women compared to men. One RCT
reports a reduction in effectiveness in increasing physical activity in women compared to
men. One uncontrolled before-and- after study and two CBA studies report a reduction in
effectiveness in reducing smoking prevalence in women compared to men. One CBA study
reports a reduction in effectiveness in reducing cholesterol in women compared to men.
One CBA study reports a reduction in effectiveness in drinking low-fat compared to high-
fat milk in women compared to men. Two programmes report a reduction in effectiveness
in men compared to women. Two CBA studies report a reduction in effectiveness in
promoting CVD awareness and acquisition of CVD knowledge in men compared to women
and one CBA study reports a reduction in effectiveness in reducing CVD morbidity and
mortality in men compared to women. One CBA study reports no differences in
effectiveness according to gender.
Evidence statement R3.E2e
Social class: Two programmes report results of subgroup analysis according to social
class. One CBA study reports a reduction in effectiveness in reducing smoking in lower
social classes compared to higher social classes. One CBA study reports no differences in
effectiveness according to social class.
Evidence statement R3.E2f
Level of education: One programme reports results of subgroup analysis according to level
of education. One CBA study reports a reduction in effectiveness in CVD awareness in
those relatively more educated.
Evidence statement R3.E3a
Nature of the interventions: Thirty one programmes were concerned with the
effectiveness of population programmes using education and mass media, and seven with
screening programmes directed at large populations in the community or primary care.
However, 16 of the education and mass-media programmes contained screening
components. Counselling was a key process in many programmes, undertaken individually

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
in 24 programmes and amongst groups in 16 programmes. The 38 programmes varied in
many other ways. Programme length ranged from one to over 20 years. The size of the
population addressed ranged from approximately 2,500 to over 1 million. Fourteen of the
programmes implemented changes to the environment. Health departments (n=23) [where
n is the number of programmes in which the organisations indicated were involved], local
health committees (n=12), voluntary organisations (n=11) and community volunteers (n=9)
had roles in programme delivery. Programmes were delivered in a variety of settings
including workplaces (n=12) and schools (n=18).
Evidence statement E.3b
Education and mass-media based programmes compared to screening based: As
indicated this was the most marked contrast between the programmes. However,
comparing the effectiveness of the 2 groups is complicated:
• Many of the education and mass-media based programmes contain elements of
screening.
• There are many CVD screening programmes, particularly focused on moderate or
high-risk populations which are not included in this review.
• The comparison between the 2 groups is likely to be confounded by other factors, a
very important one of which is that CBA studies are used to evaluate most of the
education and mass-media based programmes, and RCTs all the screening based
programmes.
With these provisos (and reference to pages 127 to 131 in report 3), the pattern of results
for the risk factors of cholesterol, blood pressure (BP), smoking and body mass index
(BMI) in the 2 different groups of programmes are summarised in the tables below. In each
case the programme result (beneficial, inconclusive, disbeneficial or no data) is based on
direction of effect:
Net change in mean total cholesterol in mmol/litre
Programme type (n=38) Beneficial Inconclusive Disbeneficial No data
Educational and mass media 9 4 2 16
Screening 5 0 0 2

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Net change in systolic BP in mmHg
Programme type (n=38) Beneficial Inconclusive Disbeneficial No data
Educational and mass media 6 4 4 17
Screening 5 0 0 2
Net change in diastolic BP in mmHg
Programme type (n=38) Beneficial Inconclusive Disbeneficial No data
Educational and mass media 7 5 2 17
Screening 5 0 0 2
Net change in BMI in kg/m2
Programme type (n=38) Beneficial Inconclusive Disbeneficial No data
Educational and mass media 8 3 3 17
Screening 3 0 0 4
Net change in smoking prevalence in %
Programme type (n=38) Beneficial Inconclusive Disbeneficial No data
Educational and mass media 9 6 5 11
Screening 3 1 0 3
Although the results are similar, there does appear to be a more consistent pattern of
benefit in the programmes focusing on screening. As well as the provisos mentioned
above, the following also need to be borne in mind when taking this observation at face
value:
• Whether this difference could be accounted for by chance alone.
• Whether the difference would persist if the size of the effects could be taken into
account.
• Vote counting as a method of summarising the results in a systematic review is
recognised to be the weakest approach.
Evidence statement R3.E3c
Possible variations in effectiveness by other aspects of the nature of the intervention:

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Over the three reports, many other plausible reasons for the noted variation in
effectiveness have been identified. These include:
• duration of programme
• intensity of programme
• use of an underlying theoretical model to inform the design of the programme
• pre-programme investigation of particular risk factors operating in a population
• community involvement in planning and/or design of programme
• adaptability of the programme as new challenges emerge
• level of integration of the separate components of the programme
• inclusion of environmental changes as part of the programme.
Whether any of these factors account for differences in effectiveness which could not
arise by chance alone has not been fully explored, and their potential importance can
neither be confirmed nor refuted. Unfortunately, the extent to which the differences could
ever be satisfactorily explored using the results from these evaluations is debatable given
noted limitations in the reporting of the precise differences in nature of the programmes
and the amount of statistical information available.
Evidence statement R3.E5c
Age: Fifteen programmes report participation in programme interventions and/or
programme evaluation surveys according to age. One uncontrolled before-and-after study
and 13 CBA studies report lower participation in evaluation surveys or programme
interventions by those of younger age whilst one CBA study reports no difference in
participation according to age.
Evidence statement R4.1b
These suggest that factors influencing success include: time limitations for projects,
leadership, (including difficulties engaging community members at strategic levels), and
cooperation between partner organisations.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.2a
Four study reports show conflicting evidence about the degree and methods of
community engagement important for success.
Evidence statement R4.2b
For programmes that were successful, one study reports that positive community
expectations about the potential of the programme to effect wider change facilitated
community engagement. It is suggested that insufficient community engagement did not
significantly impact on another programme's success.
Evidence statement R4.2c
For programmes that were unsuccessful, 1 study reports that previous negative
experiences of community programmes discouraged community engagement. Conversely,
another study reports engagement in the programme increased willingness for future
involvement.
Evidence statement R4.3a
There is evidence from five study reports that community programmes to address heart
health can be affected by the broader political context.
Evidence statement R4.3b
This can effect diverse organisational elements such as: the availability of project funding,
the development of partnerships between organisations and a sense of shared purpose at
different administrative levels. Individual responses may also be affected through
legislation incentives to healthier behaviours.
Evidence statement R4.4a
There is evidence from four study reports that high pricing can impact on people's ability
and willingness to adopt healthy eating behaviours and to participate in organised physical
activity.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.7a
Six study reports discuss factors relating to organisational and strategic issues.
Evidence statement R4.7b
There is evidence from four studies that short time frames limit the ability to plan and
develop the programme, engage the community, develop partnerships and
communication, meet targets and leave a positive legacy.
Evidence statement R4.7c
Leadership was identified as a key organisational benefit of programmes by three studies.
It is required to develop partnerships and collaborations within communities, and is
important at all levels, from volunteers to with senior administrators. One study failed to
see the desired shift in leadership to the community itself.
Evidence statement R4.8a
Evidence from 6 study reports is related to the organisational culture and partnerships of
those involved in CVD programme services.
Evidence statement R4.8b
Three studies note differences in culture between partner organisations including frames
of reference, terminology and programme expectations although this didn't always lead to
conflict.
Evidence statement R4.8c
Four studies suggest that CVD programmes are enhanced where partner organisations
have aligned values, priorities, focus and goals between organisations.
Evidence statement R4.8d
Partnerships may have positive effects through interagency learning, increasing the
visibility of smaller organisations and enhanced funding opportunities.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.9e
Two studies note that to sustain the provision of healthier food options, communities need
to take them up and so they need to be made attractive and clear.
Evidence statement R4.9f
One study found that community projects were largely unwilling address smoking,
preferring to promote physical activity.
Evidence statement R4.10a
Five studies reported on staffing successful programmes.
Evidence statement R4.10b
Three studies report difficulties in recruitment and retention.
Evidence statement R4.10c
Positive staff contributions were defined in three studies where successful networking
allowed staff to use their time effectively because they were not duplicating activities;
where they were assisted by structures that focus on heart health issues and where
flexibility allowed them to spend significant periods of time with participants.
Evidence statement R4.10d
Positive staff characteristics included knowledge and interest in heart health and being
upbeat and friendly. A range of specialist staff should be involved.
Evidence statement R4.11a
Six study reports make specific comments about funding and resource requirements.
Evidence statement R4 11.b
Five study reports note the need for those with existing roles and responsibilities to be

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
given resources to take on additional CVD programme work, or for dedicated positions to
be created. Limited time for school-based staff may be a particular problem.
Evidence statement R4.12a
Two studies identify effective communication between organisations, staff and the
community, to be important, but use different mechanisms to achieve this: lay health
advisers or having a full-time project coordinator.
Evidence statement R4.13a
Four study reports discuss recruiting and retaining programme volunteers.
Evidence statement R4.13b
Volunteers need adequate resourcing and leadership, and may be motivated by witnessing
positive changes in the community.
Evidence statement R4.13c
One study suggests that volunteers find health promotion less satisfying than traditional
patient service roles.
Evidence statement R4.13d
Two study reports about the same programme note that lay health advisers, recruited from
the target community, were key.
Evidence statement R4.14a
Two study reports mention the role of GPs in community CVD projects.
Evidence statement R4.14b
GP uptake was slow and it is suggested that GPs may be less comfortable in health
promotion roles than their traditional role of secondary prevention.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.15a
Evidence relating to staff training were identified by six study reports.
Evidence statement R4.15b
While skills training is needed, involvement in the programme itself increases skills and
knowledge through sharing information and implementing theoretical knowledge.
Evidence statement R4.16a
Five study reports relate to the evaluation of CVD prevention programmes.
Evidence statement R4.16b
Two study reports found that process evaluation and action research raised self-
awareness among staff and promoted programme improvement. While a third reports that
time limited projects limit the possibility of such learning.
Evidence statement R4.16c
Data management was a challenge in long-term projects and those with multiple strands
across a number of organisations.
Evidence statement R4.17a
There is evidence from 8 study reports about community engagement in CVD prevention
programmes.
Evidence statement R4.17b
Two study reports suggest that successful community engagement requires multiple
approaches across populations.
Evidence statement R4.17c
Two study reports suggest that successful programmes need to be sensitive to

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
communities' habits and cultural patterns, while a further three describe the important of
matching programme staff to the social and/or ethnic characteristics of the target
communities.
Evidence statement R4.17d
Challenges to community engagement include engaging community representatives at
strategic levels; building confidence in community leaders; difficulties breaking into
existing networks; competing with other community events; reaching young people;
reluctance due to the legacy of negative experiences with previous initiatives; lack of
enthusiasm in the community.
Evidence statement R4.18a
Seven studies report that the local physical environment had important effects on the
ability of community CVD risk-reduction projects to be successful.
Evidence statement R4.18b
Five studies reported that access to healthy food options was limited, while unhealthy
food was more visible, both in the community and in school-based programmes.
Evidence statement R4.18c
Local barriers to physical activity including no sidewalks, unmetalled roads or loose dogs;
lack of school provision to secure bikes or store kit which discourages extra-curricular
exercise; and local availability of gyms or other facilities.
Evidence statement R4.19a
Community and familial norms: There is evidence from one study report among British
Asians that stress from a variety of sources was a noted problem among both men and
women and this might lead to inability to access essential services or to communicate with
professionals.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.20a
Attitudes to food and cooking: There is evidence from three study reports that specific
foods and eating patterns may be regarded as important expressions of cultural identity.
Cultural norms about food types and their preparation may not be the healthiest from a
CVD prevention perspective.
Evidence statement R4.21a
There is evidence from three study reports about cultural attitudes to weight and exercise.
Evidence statement R4.21b
These suggest that, among some groups, understandings of greater weight as a sign of
wealth and health may persist which may challenge successful adoption of CVD
prevention activities.
Evidence statement R4.21c
Further, specific connotations of language used to describe weight and physical activities
may exist, so shared understandings between clinical and community meanings should not
be assumed.
Evidence statement R4.22a
Fatalism and health: There is evidence from three study reports, among three different
ethnic groups, of fatalistic attitudes where one's state of health is the will of God.
Evidence statement R4.23a
There is evidence from 6 study reports to suggest that a benefit of community CVD
programmes is in providing leadership that encourages local attitudes to change for the
better.
Evidence statement R4.23b
As well as making personal changes, such 'social health' encouraged changes within the

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
family, within the local community and within the wider social and political community.
Despite this, one study suggests that men remain less likely to use health services.
Evidence statement R4.24a
Nine studies discuss community perceptions of CVD risk factors.
Evidence statement R4.24b
Six studies report high levels of understanding about CVD risk among the target
population while 2 suggest limited understanding and 2 suggest challenges in turning
knowledge into action.
Evidence statement R4.24c
One study suggests that different types of knowledge are at play (theoretical, practical,
experiential and intuitive), and where there is a discrepancy between theoretical and
experiential knowledge, the latter influences what participants do. These links might be
challenged by cues to action (health belief model), most significantly breakdown of self-
image and social networks.
Evidence statement R4.24d
One study develops a typology of 6 'ideal types' of functional and dysfunctional attitude
among programme participants who see it as a blessing, an opportunity, a confirmation, a
watchman, a disappointment or an insult. The latter 2 are negative or 'dysfunctional' in
terms of positive health choices and more men have these attitudes.
Evidence statement R4.25a
Nine study reports discuss people's motivations for, or resistance to, adopting risk
reduction behaviours.
Evidence statement R4.25b
Two studies report that health concerns, sometimes serious, were motivating factors to
participate and 2 that feedback of physiological test results was motivating.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R4.25c
Women may be targeted to take heart health practices home, however, 2 studies report on
difficulties initiating or maintaining family interest and that resistance from family members
was a barrier to adopting healthier behaviour. It is difficult to maintain behaviour changes
amidst the usual business of family commitments.
Evidence statement R4.25d
One study suggests that there is a need for ongoing support in order for behavioural
changes to be made and maintained.
Evidence statement R4.25e
One study found that secondary school pupils enjoyed the freedom to make food choices
not available at primary school, pupils' food choices, and those of the wider population,
may reflect issues other than health.
Evidence statement R4.26a
Six studies report on participant perceptions of programmes in which they were involved.
Evidence statement R4.26b
In 2 studies participants reported improving heart health through weight loss, increased
exercise, as well as increased awareness and use of services and programme activities.
One study also suggests that networks providing community support was a benefit.
Evidence statement R4.26c
One study found that practical demonstrations were much more successful than
information provision alone.
Evidence statement R4.26d
Two studies suggest that the participants may doubt the credibility of health messages,
with so many sources of, sometimes contradictory, information available. Matching the

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
characteristics of the community may be important.
Evidence statement R5.2
Community engagement: Positive community engagement requires trusting, respectful
relationships to be built which motivate and support change. Community engagement
should be an ongoing and dynamic partnership which responds to community needs.
As CVD may not be seen as an immediate concern within targeted communities, staff may
first need to listen and respond to the existing concerns of the community. This may be
done through participating in existing networks and forums, or creating forums that have
more open agendas, at least to start with.
Sufficient time is needed to ensure that this is done appropriately and also to ensure that
changes become adopted by the community so that they are empowered to continue,
even if the project itself comes to an end.
Information and education is likely to be more effective if it relates to the experiences of
the community, and if those that deliver it are seen as part of that community.
Appropriately skilled staff are needed for effective community engagement.
Greater levels of participation, that involve community members as partners or devolve
power to them, may have additional benefits, ensuring that programmes are truly
responsive to community needs, involving local people in the complexities of planning and
delivering such programmes and so facilitating understanding within the community.
Done well, community engagement may create a positive feedback loop which motivates
change, improving health which produces greater motivation. However, care needs to be
taken to ensure that those adopting behaviour change are not just those already
motivated to change, thereby increasing, rather than lessening, health inequalities.
Evidence statement R5.3
Staffing – leadership: Strong, inspirational leadership may be important to initiate,
coordinate and drive complex programmes and motivate and encourage cooperation
among multiple staff across a number of agencies with a range of responsibilities.
To fulfil this, staff are needed whose role is dedicated to the programme and those with

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
multiple roles need to have appropriate time freed up.
Leaders may be needed for the project overall, but also for specific elements of the
project, for example, to encourage primary care participation or ensure local political or
funding support. Leaders from within the community are also needed to champion the
project and facilitate engagement.
Expectations of leadership roles should be matched by appropriate control and
responsibility, and given the necessary training and support.
Evidence statement R5.4
Staffing – staff engagement: To ensure that staff are engaged with the aims of a CVD
prevention programme, they require appropriate training and resources, a good
understanding of how their role fits into the programme overall and a clear understanding
of the extent of their roles and responsibilities.
Evidence statement R5.5
Staffing – GPs: The role of primary care was complicated and sometimes contradictory.
Some GPs may be more comfortable with a secondary, rather than primary, prevention
role, which may explain why some participants found it difficult to engage them in CVD
prevention programmes. Conversely, other participants viewed primary care as crucial
partners in CVD prevention. Advocacy among other local organisations may be a key role.
Where primary care is involved in CVD prevention programmes, they need to receive
appropriate resources to free-up staff time.
Engaging primary care and keeping them appropriately informed may require tailored
approaches.
Evidence statement R5.6
Staffing – volunteers: Volunteers from within the community may be particularly effective
at informing, motivating and engaging their peers in the community and enhance
community empowerment.
Volunteer workers need to be properly trained and supported to ensure that they continue

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
to be involved and don't get burnt out.
The issues of paying those involved should be considered carefully.
Evidence statement R5.7
Staffing – multi-agency, multi-disciplinary teams: Public health work to reduce CVD is likely
to require the involvement of multiple agencies and disciplines.
Coordination and cooperation is required to build trust and a sense of shared purpose
through aligning the goals and activities of different agencies involved, and assigning clear
roles and responsibilities to participating organisations and staff within them. Joint
appointments may facilitate this. Ongoing feedback and communication is vital.
Sufficient time is needed to successfully negotiate and accommodate different
expectations and bureaucracies.
Evidence statement R5.8
Legacy: CVD reduction programmes may enhance their longer-term impact through
ensuring that programme activities are embedded within organisations and the
community.
Appropriate training and support for key staff, and community members, from project
inception may help to ensure activities become 'institutionalised'. Ongoing sources of
funding should also be identified.
Programme impacts should be regularly assessed and results fed back to staff and
organisations so that successful activities are recognised and adopted. This will require
the identification of appropriate resources.
Early and ongoing community engagement may ensure ongoing changes in healthy
behaviours, empowering the community to maintain positive changes. Short-term projects
often fail to leave lasting benefits to a community as their short-term goal setting may
preclude the necessary engagement required.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement R5.9
Short time frames: Short time frames for CVD prevention programmes may threaten
success at a number of levels: implementation, staff engagement and training, community
engagement, evaluation and legacy. It is difficult for such programmes to meet community
needs, staff needs or to permit changes to become embedded in the community. This may
lead communities and local agencies to lose faith in such interventions, further hampering
the ability of future work to be successful in those areas.
Evidence statement R5.10
Structural barriers: At a macro-level, changes in the broader political environment can have
dramatic effects on the adoption and continuation of prevention activities.
Support for CVD prevention programmes may be affected by changing political priorities
around prevention and treatment of illness.
Evidence statement R5.11
Piloting and monitoring: Cyclical approaches to monitoring and evaluation, such as piloting,
process evaluation and action research, allow project to be responsive to local needs,
adapting or removing inappropriate projects and allowing successful projects to be rolled
out.
Information from this process fed back to staff in a timely way can help develop a sense of
ownership and cooperation and motivate good practice.
Organisations and individuals should also learn from the experiences of previous projects.
Evidence statement R5.12
Challenges of evaluation: Commissioners and funders may need to allow flexibility in
programme evaluation designs to allow them to adapt to local needs, rather than requiring
fixed plans prior to funding. In addition, programmes and evaluations should allow
sufficient time for outcomes to be achieved.
Multiple methods may be needed to evaluate important aspects of CVD prevention
programmes, such as community empowerment, that are not all easily captured through

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
numerical outcome data.
Programmes that measure only population-level changes may not capture large impacts
for some individuals, and this may be important, especially where health inequalities are
addressed.
Evidence statement CE1
Three studies gave results in cost per life-year gained for population-based programmes
compared to no intervention. The results ranged from cost-saving to £240,000 per life-
year gained.
Evidence statement CE2
Two studies gave results in cost per QALY or DALY (disability-adjusted life years) for
population-based programmes compared to no intervention. Results ranged from £10 per
QALY to £96 per DALY.
Evidence statement CE3
Two studies gave results in cost per case prevented for population-based programmes
compared to no intervention. Results ranged from cost saving to £22,000 per case
prevented.
Evidence statement CE4
Five studies reported results in cost per life-year gained for some form of screening
strategy compared to no intervention. Results ranged from cost saving to £140,000 per
life-year gained.
Evidence statement CE5
Two studies gave results in cost per case prevented for screening compared to no
intervention. Results ranged from £10,000 to £730,000 per case prevented.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Evidence statement CE6
Two studies gave results per 1% reduction in coronary risk for screening compared to no
intervention. Results ranged from £2.25 to £5.30 per 1% reduction for 1 person.
Evidence statement CE7
One study gave a result of £0.80 per pound weight lost for a screening programme
compared to no intervention.
Evidence statement CE8
One study gave results ranging from £12,000 to £120,000 per life-year gained and
£100,000 to £230,000 per QALY for screening compared to a population-based approach.
Evidence statement CE9
One study gave results from cost saving to £39,000 per life-year gained for some form of
exercise training.
Additional evidence
• Expert reports:
－ ER 1: The effectiveness of physical activity promotion interventions
－ ER 3: Expert testimony on salt and cardiovascular disease
－ ER 4: The relationship between commercial interests and risk of cardiovascular
disease
－ ER 5: Regional development of a population-based collaborative CVD prevention
strategy: the experience of NHS West Midlands
－ ER 6: NICE guidance on the prevention of CVD at population level: evidence from
the Co-operative Group
－ ER 7: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors to
prevent cardiovascular disease (CVD): addendum to qualitative study produced by

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Peninsula Technology Assessment Group for NICE: CVD programme – Heart of
Mersey (HoM)
－ ER 8: Expert testimony paper on the independent evaluation of 'have a heart
Paisley' phase one (Scotland's national CHD prevention demonstration project)
－ ER 9: Expert testimony on the public health harm caused by industrially produced
trans fatty acids and actions to reduce and eliminate them from the food system in
the UK
－ ER 10: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at a population level: evidence on
interventions to address dietary fats
－ ER 11: CVD risk factors: paradigms and pathways
－ ER 12: CVD prevention in populations: lessons from other countries
－ ER 13: Will CVD prevention widen health inequalities?
• NICE's guideline on overweight and obesity management: CG43 Full guideline, section
3 - prevention: evidence statements and reviews:
－ (1) Section 7.4.1.3 Evidence of corroboration
－ (2) Evidence statement 5, Section 12 Prevention evidence summary: broader
community interventions (Community 2)
－ (3) Evidence statement 6, Section 12 Prevention evidence summary: broader
community interventions (Community 2)
－ (4) Evidence statement 2, Section 10 Prevention evidence summary: broader
community interventions (Community 2)
Cost-effectiveness evidence
The economic analysis consisted of a review of economic evaluations and a cost-
effectiveness analysis.
• 'Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (question 1; cost-
effectiveness)'
• 'Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level: modelling strategies for

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease'.
Some primary prevention programmes involving education, mass media and screening
with a general population were found to be effective and cost effective. They may reduce
some of the risk factors for CVD, including changing behaviours which increase the risk.
However, when the findings from all programmes were summarised, the overall effect on
health outcomes was uncertain. In addition, as these programmes were conducted many
years ago, the findings may not be generally applicable in the UK now.
The cost-effectiveness analysis strongly suggests that legislation likely to reduce the risk
of CVD can be expected to produce a net cost saving to the public sector, as well as
improving health. (Unless a very large sum of money needs to be spent on
implementation.)
For example, implementing a CVD prevention programme based on the North Karelia
project would result in an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of approximately £7000 per
quality-adjusted life year (QALY). For the Stanford Five City Project, the total healthcare
cost savings almost equal the estimated cost of the project. The benefits of reducing the
prevalence of smoking would also make the programme cost saving.
At the request of the Programme Development Group (PDG), the scope of the modelling
was extended beyond programmes for which there was direct evidence of effectiveness.
Interventions modelled included:
• The North Karelia project, including the effect of a net percentage reduction in serum
cholesterol of 3% for men and 1% for women, and a reduction in systolic blood
pressure of 3% for men and 5% for women.
• The Stanford Five City Project, the effect of a 4% reduction in systolic blood pressure
and a 2% decrease in serum cholesterol among the general population.
• Legislation to ban trans fats and so reduce trans fatty acid (TFA) levels in the
population so that it only accounts for approximately 0.7% of total energy intake.
• Legislation to reduce the population's salt intake by 3 g and 6 g per day.
The modelling made a number of conservative assumptions. It found that halving CVD
events across the entire England and Wales population of 50 million would result in
discounted savings of approximately £14 billion per year. Reducing mean population
cholesterol or blood pressure levels by 5% would result in discounted annual savings of

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
approximately £0.7 billion and £0.9 billion respectively. Reducing population cardiovascular
risk by even 1% would generate discounted savings of approximately £260 million per year.
Additional benefits to existing CVD patients, and reductions in other diseases, were not
quantified.
As the model is based on a series of conservative assumptions, it probably seriously
underestimates the true health benefits to be gained from the recommendations.
Fieldwork findings
Fieldwork aimed to test the relevance, usefulness and feasibility of putting the
recommendations into practice. The PDG considered the findings when developing the
final recommendations. For details, go to the fieldwork section in appendix B and the
fieldwork report.
Feedback to the recommendations varied.
Food industry recommendations (1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 in the
consultation document)
It was indicated, particularly by some food industry stakeholders, that:
• It was felt that NICE has 'a lot less weight' in the food and planning sectors and that
we would need to work much more closely with them to gain support for the
recommendations.
• Food industry representatives generally (but not unanimously) indicated that trans fats
were 'no longer an issue' and should, therefore, not be included in the
recommendations. They also questioned the levels of saturated fat and salt
recommended, as they were unaware of the evidence to support a reduction to these
levels.
• Catering industry recommendations (6, 14 and 15 in the consultation document).
In general, stakeholders felt that the catering recommendations demonstrated how to
follow good practice.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
• Local authority planning recommendations (7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17 and 18 in the
consultation document)
Local planning and policy representatives stated that the recommendations needed to
become part of national planning policy or law. Otherwise, it would not be possible to
implement them.
Communications recommendation (number 11 in the consultation
document)
There was limited feedback from the industry as some of the target organisations disputed
that it was relevant to them and declined the opportunity to be interviewed.
CVD programme recommendations (19 to 24 in the consultation
document)
In general, representatives from the NHS and PCTs indicated that the regional CVD
prevention recommendations were appropriate and that they supported current work on
CVD prevention.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Appendix D: Gaps in the evidence
The Programme Development Group (PDG) identified a number of gaps in the evidence
related to the programmes under examination based on an assessment of the evidence,
stakeholder and expert comment and fieldwork. These gaps are set out below.
1. There is a lack of UK studies on the effectiveness of programmes to prevent CVD among
black and minority ethnic groups living in the UK.
2. There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of interventions targeting those with
high risk factors who believe their health is bad.
3. There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of providing emotional support and help
to develop general coping skills as part of interventions to prevent CVD.
4. There is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of CVD prevention programmes
involving the families of those at risk.
5. There is a lack of controlled comparison studies looking at the effectiveness of lay
health advisers in helping to prevent CVD.
The group made 6 recommendations for research.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Appendix E: supporting documents
The supporting documents include:
• Evidence reviews:
－ Review 1: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 1)
－ Review 2: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 2)
－ Review 3: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
phase 3)
－ Review 4: Barriers to, and facilitators for, multiple risk factor programmes aimed at
reducing cardiovascular disease within a given population: a systematic review of
qualitative research.
• Primary research:
－ Review 5: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors
to prevent cardiovascular disease: A qualitative study into how and why some
programmes are more successful than others.
• Economic analysis:
－ Review 6: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level (Question 1;
cost-effectiveness).
• Economic modelling:
－ Prevention of cardiovascular disease at population level: modelling strategies for
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease.
• Expert reports:
－ Report 1: The effectiveness of physical activity promotion interventions
－ Report 2: Health policy analysis

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
－ Report 3: Expert testimony on salt and cardiovascular disease
－ Report 4: The relationship between commercial interests and risk of
cardiovascular disease
－ Report 5: Regional development of a population-based collaborative CVD
prevention strategy: the experience of NHS West Midlands
－ Report 6: NICE guidance on the prevention of CVD at population level: evidence
from the Co-operative Group
－ Report 7: Population and community programmes addressing multiple risk factors
to prevent cardiovascular disease (CVD): addendum to qualitative study produced
by Peninsula Technology Assessment Group for NICE: CVD programme – Heart of
Mersey (HoM)
－ Report 8: Expert testimony paper on the independent evaluation of 'have a heart
Paisley' phase one (Scotland's national CHD prevention demonstration project)
－ Report 9: Expert testimony on the public health harm caused by industrially
produced trans fatty acids and actions to reduce and eliminate them from the food
system in the UK
－ Report 10: Prevention of cardiovascular disease at a population level: evidence on
interventions to address dietary fats
－ Report 11: CVD risk factors: paradigms and pathways
－ Report 12: CVD prevention in populations: lessons from other countries
－ Report 13: Will CVD prevention widen health inequalities?
－ Report 14: Food manufacturer's perspective.
• Fieldwork report: Fieldwork on prevention of cardiovascular disease at population
level.

Cardiovascular disease prevention (PH25)
Finding more information and committee
details
To find NICE guidance on related topics, including guidance in development, see the NICE
topic page on acute coronary syndromes.
For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the
evidence. You can also find information about how the guideline was developed, including
details of the committee.
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For
general help and advice on putting our guidelines into practice, see resources to help you
put NICE guidance into practice.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6246-4
