Chronic heart failure in adults
Quality statements
Statement 1 Adults presenting in primary care with suspected heart failure have their
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) measured. [2023]
Statement 2 Adults with suspected heart failure have specialist assessment and
transthoracic echocardiography within 2 weeks of referral if they have a very high
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level, or 6 weeks if they have a
high NT-proBNP level. [2011, updated 2023]
Statement 3 Adults with newly diagnosed and pre-existing chronic heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction receive all appropriate medication at optimal tolerated doses.
[2011, updated 2025]
Statement 4 Adults with chronic heart failure have a review within 2 weeks of any change
in the dose or type of their heart failure medication. [2016]
Statement 5 Adults with chronic heart failure have a review of their condition at least every
6 months. [2011, updated 2016]
Statement 6 Adults with chronic heart failure receive a personalised programme of cardiac
rehabilitation. [2011, updated 2023]
In 2023, this quality standard was updated and statements prioritised in 2011 and 2016
were updated (2011, updated 2023), remained unchanged (2016), or were replaced
(2023). For more information, see update information.
The previous version of the quality standard for chronic heart failure in adults is available
as a pdf.

 
Quality statement 1: N-terminal pro-B-
type natriuretic peptide measurement
Quality statement
Adults presenting in primary care with suspected heart failure have their N-terminal
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) measured. [2023]
Rationale
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide measurement in primary care can confirm
whether heart failure is likely when it is suspected and there is no existing diagnosis of
heart failure. People can then be referred for specialist assessment and echocardiography,
begin appropriate treatment at an earlier point in their illness, and lower their risk of
hospitalisation and mortality.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults diagnosed with heart failure by specialist assessment and
echocardiography who had NT-proBNP measured before diagnosis.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who had NT-proBNP measured before
diagnosis.
Denominator – the number of adults diagnosed with heart failure by specialist assessment
and echocardiography.
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified.

 
Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare professionals and
provider organisations, for example from patient records.
Outcome
Hospital admissions due to heart failure.
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on hospital admission rates
for heart failure.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (primary care) ensure that systems are in place to measure NT-proBNP
when heart failure is suspected in adults.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs and practice nurses) ensure that when they
suspect heart failure in adults, they arrange or carry out NT-proBNP measurement.
Commissioners (integrated care systems) ensure that NT-proBNP testing is available in
primary care settings.
Adults with suspected heart failure have a blood test by their GP or practice nurse to find
out how well their heart is working.
Source guidance
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106 (2018,
updated 2025), recommendation 1.2.2
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Adults with suspected heart failure
Adults may be suspected of having heart failure after being:

 
• Asked about symptoms:
－ breathlessness – on exertion, at rest, on lying flat (orthopnoea), nocturnal cough,
or waking from sleep (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea)
－ fluid retention (ankle swelling, bloated feeling, abdominal swelling, or weight gain)
－ fatigue, decreased exercise tolerance, or increased recovery time after exercise
－ light headedness or history of syncope (fainting).
• Asked about risk factors:
－ coronary artery disease including previous history of myocardial infarction,
hypertension, atrial fibrillation and diabetes mellitus
－ drugs use, including alcohol
－ family history of heart failure or sudden cardiac death under the age of 40 years.
• And examined for:
－ tachycardia (heart rate over 100 beats per minute) and pulse rhythm
－ a laterally displaced apex beat, heart murmurs, and third or fourth heart sounds
(gallop rhythm)
－ hypertension; for more information, see NICE's clinical knowledge summary on
hypertension
－ raised jugular venous pressure
－ enlarged liver (due to engorgement)
－ respiratory signs such as tachypnoea, basal crepitations, and pleural effusions
－ dependent oedema (legs, sacrum), ascites
－ obesity; for more information, see NICE's clinical knowledge summary on obesity.
[Adapted from NICE's clinical knowledge summary on chronic heart failure]

 
Quality statement 2: Specialist assessment
Quality statement
Adults with suspected heart failure have specialist assessment and transthoracic
echocardiography within 2 weeks of referral if they have a very high N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level, or 6 weeks if they have a high NT-proBNP level.
[2011, updated 2023]
Rationale
Adults who have high (between 400 and 2,000 ng/litre) or very high levels (over 2,000 ng/
litre) of NT-proBNP have a higher likelihood of heart failure and a poorer prognosis. Having
transthoracic echocardiography concurrently with specialist assessment to confirm heart
failure classification within 2 or 6 weeks of referral can help to ensure that the person is
started on appropriate treatment to manage their condition.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Structure
Evidence of local service pathways and written clinical protocols to ensure that adults with
suspected heart failure who have been referred for diagnosis have transthoracic
echocardiography and specialist assessment within 2 or 6 weeks based on their
NT-proBNP level.
Data source: No routinely collected data for this measure has been identified. Data can be
collected from information recorded locally by healthcare provider organisations, for
example from service pathways or protocols.

 
Process
a) Proportion of adults with very high levels of NT-proBNP, who have been referred for
diagnosis, who have transthoracic echocardiography and specialist assessment within
2 weeks of referral.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who have transthoracic echocardiography
and specialist assessment within 2 weeks of referral.
Denominator – the number of adults with very high levels of NT-proBNP who have been
referred for diagnosis.
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified.
Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare professionals and
provider organisations, for example from patient records.
b) Proportion of adults with high levels of NT-proBNP, who have been referred for
diagnosis, who have transthoracic echocardiography and specialist assessment within
6 weeks of referral.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who have transthoracic echocardiography
and specialist assessment within 6 weeks of referral.
Denominator – the number of adults with high levels of NT-proBNP who have been
referred for diagnosis.
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified.
Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare professionals and
provider organisations, for example from patient records.
Outcome
Hospital admissions due to heart failure.
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on hospital admission rates
for heart failure.

 
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as secondary care) ensure that systems such as referral
pathways, as well as appropriate equipment and staff training, are in place for adults with
suspected heart failure to have an echocardiogram and be seen by a specialist
concurrently within 2 or 6 weeks of referral based on their levels of NT-proBNP.
Healthcare professionals (such as consultant cardiologists) ensure that adults with
suspected heart failure have an echocardiogram and specialist assessment within 2 or
6 weeks of referral based on their levels of NT-proBNP.
Commissioners (integrated care systems) ensure that they commission services in which
adults with suspected heart failure have an echocardiogram and specialist assessment
concurrently within 2 or 6 weeks of referral based on their levels of NT-proBNP.
Adults with suspected heart failure who have been referred for diagnosis have a test
called an echocardiogram and are seen by a heart specialist at the same time. This should
happen within 2 weeks of being referred by their GP if a blood test shows very high levels
of a substance (called an N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide) that suggests they
may have heart failure needing urgent treatment. It should happen within 6 weeks if those
levels are high. An echocardiogram is a test to check the structure of the heart and how
well it is working. The specialist will carry out an assessment and confirm whether they
have chronic heart failure. If chronic heart failure is diagnosed, the specialist will try to find
the cause, offer treatment and talk to the person about how to manage the condition.
Source guidance
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106 (2018,
updated 2025), recommendations 1.2.3 and 1.2.4
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Specialist assessment
Specialist assessment includes tests to evaluate for possible aggravating factors and to

 
exclude other conditions with similar presentations, and confirm a diagnosis of heart
failure, including the type of reduced or preserved ejection fraction. It also includes
assessment for underlying causes where appropriate.
The assessment should be carried out by the specialist heart failure multidisciplinary team
which should include:
• a lead physician with subspecialty training in heart failure (usually a consultant
cardiologist) who is responsible for making the clinical diagnosis
• a specialist heart failure nurse
• a healthcare professional with expertise in specialist prescribing for heart failure, for
example, a specialist heart failure pharmacist.
[Adapted from NICE's clinical knowledge summary on chronic heart failure and NICE's
guideline on chronic heart failure in adults, recommendation 1.1.1]
Very high levels of NT-proBNP
Very high levels of NT-proBNP are defined as above 2,000 ng/litre (236 pmol/litre).
[Adapted from NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults, recommendation 1.2.3]
High levels of NT-proBNP
High levels of NT-proBNP are defined as between 400 and 2,000 ng/litre (47 to 236 pmol/
litre). [Adapted from NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults, recommendation
1.2.4]

 
Quality statement 3: Medication for newly
diagnosed and pre-existing chronic heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction
Quality statement
Adults with newly diagnosed and pre-existing chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction receive all appropriate medication at optimal tolerated doses. [2011, updated
2025]
Rationale
It is important that all adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction are
given all appropriate medications at an optimal tolerated dose to best manage their
condition and provide the best outcome.
Adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction should be offered the
following treatment combination to reduce the likelihood of related hospitalisation and
mortality:
• angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
－ or an angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI)
－ or an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB)
• beta-blocker
• mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (MRA)
• sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitor.
People's medical history, findings from their clinical assessment, their frailty status,
prognosis and preferences should be used when making decisions about these medicines.
They should have regular checks to monitor any side effects, until optimal tolerated doses
are reached.

 
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
a) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction that are
prescribed an ACE inhibitor, or ARNI or ARB.
Numerator – the number in the denominator that are prescribed an ACE inhibitor, or ARNI
or ARB.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.
Data source: Data on general practice prescribing of ACE inhibitors or ARBs is available
from the NHS Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF; see QOF indicator HF003). Data on
prescribing of ACE inhibitors (or ARBs or ARNIs) on discharge from hospital is available
from the National Heart Failure Audit.
b) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction that are
prescribed a beta-blocker.
Numerator – the number in the denominator that are prescribed a beta-blocker.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.
Data source: Data on general practice prescribing of beta-blockers, is available from the
NHS Quality and Outcomes Framework (QOF; see QOF indicator HF006). Data on
prescribing of beta-blockers on discharge from hospital is available from the National
Heart Failure Audit.
c) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction that are
prescribed an MRA.

 
Numerator – the number in the denominator that are prescribed an MRA.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.
Data source: Data on prescribing of MRAs on discharge from hospital is available from the
National Heart Failure Audit.
d) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction that are
prescribed an SGLT2 inhibitor.
Numerator – the number in the denominator that are prescribed an SGLT2 inhibitor.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.
Data source: Data on prescribing of SGLT2 inhibitors on discharge from hospital is
available from the National Heart Failure Audit.
e) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction that are
prescribed an ACE inhibitor, beta-blocker, MRA and SGLT2 inhibitor.
Numerator – the number in the denominator that are prescribed an ACE inhibitor, beta-
blocker, MRA and SGLT2 inhibitor.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.
Data source: No routinely collected national data on general practice prescribing is
available for all medicines in this treatment combination, but may be collected locally by
healthcare professionals and provider organisations, for example from patient records.
Data on prescribing of ACE inhibitors (or ARNIs or ARBs, beta-blockers, MRAs and SGLT2
inhibitors) on discharge from hospital is available from the National Heart Failure Audit.
The uptake of MRAs, SGLT2 inhibitors and ARNIs in general practice prescribing for people
with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction will need to be undertaken at a
local level using any data available. This could include electronic medical records.

 
Outcome
a) Hospital admissions due to heart failure.
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on hospital admission rates
for heart failure.
b) Mortality due to heart failure with reduced ejection fraction.
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified. The
National Heart Failure Audit contains mortality data for people 1 year after discharge who
were admitted with heart failure.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (GP practices, hospitals and community providers) ensure that adults
with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction are prescribed a combination of
treatments in line with the latest NICE guidance.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs, specialists in cardiac care, heart failure specialist
nurses and clinical pharmacists) ensure that they prescribe appropriate medications in line
with their marketing authorisation and relevant NICE guidance (including clinical guidelines
and technology appraisal guidance).
They ensure that the medication is started and increased (when applicable) in accordance
with individual health needs and, if the medication requires it, based on the advice of a
heart failure specialist. They also make sure that there is monitoring for side effects and
symptoms of heart failure after each increase in dose.
Commissioners (such as integrated care systems and NHS England) ensure that they
commission services in which adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction are prescribed appropriate medication.
Adults with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (when the part of the
heart that pumps blood around the body is not squeezing the blood as well as it should)
are prescribed appropriate medications for heart failure. The medication is started and

 
increased (when applicable) with check-ins for any changes in symptoms, side effects
and, depending on the medication, based on input from their heart failure doctor.
Source guidance
• Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106
(2018, updated 2025), recommendations 1.4.1 to 1.4.4, 1.7.1 and 1.7.2
• Sacubitril valsartan for treating symptomatic chronic heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction. NICE technology appraisal 388 (2016) recommendations 1.1 and 1.2
• Dapagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. NICE
technology appraisal guidance 679 (2021), recommendations 1.1 and 1.2
• Empagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. NICE
technology appraisal guidance 773 (2022), recommendations 1.1 and 1.2
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
Heart failure with an ejection fraction below 40%. [NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure
in adults]
Appropriate medication
ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, MRAs and SGLT2 inhibitors are of proven benefit for people
with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, and NICE recommends them as
first-line treatment.
ARNIs licensed for heart failure should be considered as an alternative to an ACE inhibitor
for people on the maximum tolerated dose of each of ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, MRAs
and SGLT2 inhibitors who continue to have symptoms of heart failure, and for people with
chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction who have symptoms of intolerance to
ACE inhibitors (other than angioedema). Primary care prescribers should consider seeking
advice from a heart failure specialist before starting someone on a angiotensin receptor-
neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI).

 
ARBs licensed for heart failure should be considered for people with angioedema after
taking an ACE inhibitor, and should be considered for people who have symptoms of
intolerance of ACE inhibitors and ARNIs.
Other specialist treatments may also be appropriate for some people and should be
initiated by a heart failure specialist with access to a multidisciplinary heart failure team or
after seeking specialist advice. These treatments include ivabradine, hydralazine in
combination with nitrate (especially if the person is of African or Caribbean family origin
and has moderate to severe heart failure with reduced ejection fraction) and digoxin.
People's medical history, findings from their clinical assessment, their frailty status,
prognosis and preferences should be used when deciding:
• which specific medicines and medicine combinations to use
• the order and timing for introducing each medicine
• the initial dose of each medicine and any subsequent dose increments
• when and how to optimise the dose of each medicine.
[NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults, recommendations 1.4.1 to 1.4.4, 1.4.8 to
1.4.12, 1.7.1 and 1.7.2 and NICE's technology appraisal guidance on ivabradine, sacubitril
valsartan, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction]
Equality and diversity considerations
ACE inhibitors are less effective in people of African or Caribbean family origin. Healthcare
professionals should take this into account and ensure that the person receives additional
treatment promptly if needed.

 
Quality statement 4: Review after changes
in medication
Quality statement
Adults with chronic heart failure have a review within 2 weeks of any change in the dose or
type of their heart failure medication. [2016]
Rationale
Medication to treat chronic heart failure can cause side effects, including dehydration, low
blood pressure, a low heart rate and renal impairment. Some may initially and temporarily
make heart failure symptoms worse. When the dose or type of medication for chronic
heart failure is changed, the person should have a review within 2 weeks to monitor the
effects. This can also include a review of the effectiveness of the medication and whether
any further changes or referral to other members of the multidisciplinary team are needed.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of changes to dose or type of chronic heart failure medication in which the
person is reviewed within 2 weeks of a change.
Numerator – the number in the denominator in which the person is reviewed within
2 weeks of the change to dose or type of medication.
Denominator – the number of changes to dose or type of chronic heart failure medication
in adults with chronic heart failure.

 
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified.
Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare professionals and
provider organisations, for example from patient records.
Outcome
Hospital admissions due to heart failure.
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on hospital admission rates
for heart failure.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (GP practices, hospitals and community providers) ensure that systems
are in place so that adults with chronic heart failure have a review within 2 weeks of any
change in the dose or type of their heart failure medication.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs, specialists in cardiac care, heart failure specialist
nurses, specialist multidisciplinary heart failure teams, and clinical pharmacists with an
interest in chronic heart failure) carry out a review for adults with chronic heart failure
within 2 weeks of any change in the dose or type of their heart failure medication. The
multidisciplinary heart failure team will decide who is the most appropriate team member
to do this, for example, the GP may lead the care in consultation with other members of
the team.
Commissioners (integrated care systems) ensure that they commission services in which
adults with chronic heart failure have a review within 2 weeks of any change in the dose or
type of their heart failure medication.
Adults with chronic heart failure are seen by the appropriate healthcare professional
within 2 weeks of any change in the dose or type of medication they are taking for heart
failure, to check for any problems and make sure that the medication is working.
Source guidance
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106 (2018,

 
updated 2025), recommendations 1.8.1 and 1.8.3
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Review when medication is changed
Review should include as a minimum:
• clinical assessment of functional capacity, fluid status, cardiac rhythm (minimum of
examining the pulse), cognitive status and nutritional status
• review of medication, including need for changes and possible side effects
• an assessment of renal function
• iron status and haemoglobin measurement.
Reviews may need to be adjusted based on the medication that has been introduced or
changed, for example testing within 2 weeks of introduction of a sodium-glucose
co-transporter 2 inhibitor may show irregular results for some tests. More detailed
monitoring is needed if the person has significant comorbidity or if their condition has
deteriorated since the previous review. [Adapted from NICE's guideline on chronic heart
failure in adults, recommendations 1.8.1 and 1.8.2, and expert opinion]

 
Quality statement 5: Review of people
with chronic heart failure
Quality statement
Adults with chronic heart failure have a review of their condition at least every 6 months.
[2011, updated 2016]
Rationale
Adults with chronic heart failure should have a review of their condition at least every
6 months to ensure that their medications are working effectively, and they are not
experiencing any significant side effects. This will allow their healthcare professional to
assess whether there has been any deterioration in their condition, if their medications
should be changed, if other procedures (such as cardiac resynchronisation therapy)
should be considered and whether referral to another member of the multidisciplinary
team is needed.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure who had a review of their condition in the
past 6 months.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who had a review of their condition in the past
6 months.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure.

 
Data source: No routinely collected national data for this measure has been identified.
Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare professionals and
provider organisations, for example from patient records.
Outcome
Hospital admissions due to heart failure.
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on hospital admission rates
for heart failure.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (GP practices, hospitals, and community providers) ensure that systems
are in place so that adults with chronic heart failure have a review of their condition at
least every 6 months.
Healthcare professionals (GPs and specialist multidisciplinary heart failure team
members) ensure that they review adults with chronic heart failure at least every
6 months. The multidisciplinary heart failure team will decide on the most appropriate
member to do this, for example, the GP may lead care in consultation with other members
of the team.
Commissioners (integrated care systems) ensure that they commission services in which
adults with chronic heart failure have a review of their condition at least every 6 months.
Adults with chronic heart failure are seen at least every 6 months by their healthcare
professional, who will check how they are managing with their condition, whether their
medication needs to be changed and if other types of treatment might be suitable for
them. The person may also be referred to other members of the care team, such as a
heart failure specialist nurse.
Source guidance
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106 (2018,
updated 2025), recommendations 1.8.1 and 1.8.3

 
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Review of people with chronic heart failure
Reviews should include as a minimum:
• clinical assessment of functional capacity, fluid status, cardiac rhythm (minimum of
examining the pulse), cognitive status and nutritional status
• review of medication, including need for changes and possible side effects
• an assessment of renal function
• iron status and haemoglobin measurement.
Every 6 months, the person should have their clinical record updated by their primary care
team, and any changes should be understood and agreed by the person with heart failure
and shared with the specialist heart failure multidisciplinary team.
Healthcare professionals involved in the review should have a copy of the person's care
plan, which should include information on:
• diagnosis and aetiology
• medicines prescribed, monitoring of medicines, when medicines should be reviewed
and any support the person needs to take the medicines
• functional abilities and any social care needs
• social circumstances, including carers' needs
• plans for managing the person's heart failure, including follow-up care, rehabilitation
and access to social care
• symptoms to look out for in case of deterioration
• a process for any subsequent access to the specialist heart failure multidisciplinary
team if needed
• contact details for:
－ a named healthcare coordinator (usually a specialist heart failure nurse)

 
－ alternative local heart failure specialist care providers, for urgent care or review
• additional sources of information for people with heart failure.
For people taking amiodarone the review should include liver and thyroid function tests,
and a review of side effects.
For people with a cardioverter defibrillator, the review should consider benefits and
potential harms of it remaining active.
More detailed monitoring should be provided if the person has significant comorbidity or if
their condition has deteriorated since the previous review. Monitoring serum potassium is
particularly important if a person is taking digoxin or a mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist.
People with heart failure who wish to be involved in the monitoring of their condition
should be provided with sufficient education and support to do this, with clear guidelines
as to what to do in the event of deterioration. [Adapted from the BNF treatment summary
on chronic heart failure and NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults,
recommendations 1.1.4, 1.1.7 to 1.1.9, 1.8.1 to 1.8.4, 1.9.3, 1.9.4, and 1.10.5]

 
Quality statement 6: Cardiac
rehabilitation
Quality statement
Adults with chronic heart failure receive a personalised programme of cardiac
rehabilitation. [2011, updated 2023]
Rationale
A personalised programme of cardiac rehabilitation delivered by an appropriate method,
preceded by an assessment to ensure that it is suitable, can help to extend and improve
the quality of a person's life. Cardiac rehabilitation uses monitored exercise, psychological
support and education about lifestyle changes to reduce the risks of further heart
problems. It can also reduce uncertainty and anxiety about living with chronic heart failure.
Through better management of their condition, the person may have greater opportunities
to return to normal activities.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
a) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure who have a record of referral to a
personalised programme of cardiac rehabilitation.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who have a record of referral to a
personalised programme of cardiac rehabilitation.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure.

 
Data source: The National Heart Failure Audit contains data on patients discharged alive
after an admission with acute heart failure referred as an inpatient to cardiac rehabilitation.
b) Proportion of adults with chronic heart failure who receive a personalised programme of
cardiac rehabilitation.
Numerator – the number in the denominator who receive a personalised programme of
cardiac rehabilitation.
Denominator – the number of adults with chronic heart failure.
Data source: National data on the uptake of cardiac rehabilitation is available from the
NHS National Audit of Cardiac Rehabilitation.
Outcome
a) Rates of people with chronic heart failure completing programmes of cardiac
rehabilitation.
Data source: National data on the proportion of people with chronic heart failure
completing cardiac rehabilitation are available from the NHS National Audit of Cardiac
Rehabilitation.
b) Patient outcomes following programmes of cardiac rehabilitation.
Data source: National data on patient outcomes following cardiac rehabilitation such as
physical activity, BMI, anxiety and depression are available from the NHS National Audit of
Cardiac Rehabilitation.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (GP practices, community nursing teams and hospitals) ensure that
referral pathways to personalised programmes of cardiac rehabilitation that include a
monitored exercise, a psychological component and an educational component are
available for adults with chronic heart failure.

 
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs, cardiac rehabilitation nurses and specialists in
cardiac care) ensure that they refer adults diagnosed with chronic heart failure to a
personalised programme of cardiac rehabilitation, once they are well enough to take part.
Commissioners (integrated care systems and local authorities) ensure that they
commission services in which personalised cardiac rehabilitation programmes that include
a monitored exercise, a psychological component and an educational component are
available for adults with chronic heart failure.
Adults with chronic heart failure are offered a personalised programme of cardiac
rehabilitation if it is suitable for them, once they are well enough to take part. This
programme includes help and support with taking exercise, help with understanding their
condition, support with their thoughts and feelings around the condition, and help with
how to look after themselves.
Source guidance
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG106 (2018,
updated 2025), recommendation 1.11.1
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Personalised programme of cardiac rehabilitation
This is an exercise-based programme of rehabilitation designed for people with chronic
heart failure that includes a psychological and educational component. It should be
accompanied by information about support available from healthcare professionals. The
information should be provided in a format and setting (at home, in the community or in
the hospital) that is easily accessible. It should be suited to the person, their condition,
and their needs. [Adapted from NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults,
recommendation 1.11.1]
Equality and diversity considerations
A programme of cardiac rehabilitation should be accessible for all adults with chronic heart
failure, including those who may be housebound or in a nursing home. A range of formats

 
(for example, online, in person) and settings (at home, in the community or in the hospital)
should be provided so that everyone has their needs met.
When conducting cardiac rehabilitation in the community or in hospital, measures such as
providing transport for people to attend sessions and holding the sessions in different
locations should be considered. Cardiac rehabilitation should be held in buildings that have
access for disabled people.
Healthcare professionals should take into account the communication needs of people
with chronic heart failure, including those with cognitive impairment, when delivering
cardiac rehabilitation. All information should be culturally appropriate, and accessible to
people with additional needs such as physical, sensory or learning disabilities, and to
people who do not speak or read English. If needed, people should have access to an
interpreter or advocate as set out in NICE's guideline on advocacy services for adults with
health and social care needs.

 
Update information
September 2025: Changes have been made to align this quality standard with the
updated NICE guideline on chronic heart failure in adults. Statement 3 on medication for
chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction has been updated to reflect changes to
the guidance. Links, definitions and source guidance sections have also been updated
throughout.
January 2023: This quality standard was updated, and statements prioritised in 2011 and
2016 were updated or replaced, with some statements from 2016 remaining unchanged.
The topic was identified for update following the annual review of quality standards. The
review identified:
• potential changes in the priority areas for improvement
• that there was potential for quality statements to be combined.
Statements are marked as:
• [2023] if the statement covers a new area for quality improvement
• [2011, updated 2023] if the statement covers an area for quality improvement
included in the 2011 quality standard and has been updated
• [2016] if the statement remains unchanged
• [2011, updated 2016] if the statement covers an area for quality improvement
included in the 2011 quality standard and was updated in 2016.
The previous version of the quality standard for chronic heart failure in adults is available
as a pdf.

 
About this quality standard
NICE quality standards describe high-priority areas for quality improvement in a defined
care or service area. Each standard consists of a prioritised set of specific, concise and
measurable statements. NICE quality standards draw on existing NICE or NICE-accredited
guidance that provides an underpinning, comprehensive set of recommendations, and are
designed to support the measurement of improvement.
Expected levels of achievement for quality measures are not specified. Quality standards
are intended to drive up the quality of care, and so achievement levels of 100% should be
aspired to (or 0% if the quality statement states that something should not be done).
However, this may not always be appropriate in practice. Taking account of safety, shared
decision making, choice and professional judgement, desired levels of achievement should
be defined locally.
Information about how NICE quality standards are developed is available from the NICE
website.
See our webpage on quality standards advisory committees for details about our standing
committees. Information about the topic experts invited to join the standing members is
available from the webpage for this quality standard.
NICE has produced a quality standard service improvement template to help providers
make an initial assessment of their service compared with a selection of quality
statements. This tool is updated monthly to include new quality standards.
NICE guidance and quality standards apply in England and Wales. Decisions on how they
apply in Scotland and Northern Ireland are made by the Scottish government and Northern
Ireland Executive. NICE quality standards may include references to organisations or
people responsible for commissioning or providing care that may be relevant only to
England.
Resource impact
NICE quality standards should be achievable by local services. The potential resource
impact is considered by the quality standards advisory committee, drawing on resource

 
impact work for the source guidance. Organisations are encouraged to use the resource
impact products from NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults to help estimate
local costs.