=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "coil-embolisation-of-unruptured-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899862979478469.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:58.648056",
  "file_size_bytes": 61738,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/coil-embolisation-of-unruptured-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899862979478469.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Coil embolisation of unruptured
intracranial aneurysms
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 26 January 2005
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg105
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 2 ---
Coil embolisation of unruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG105)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Current evidence suggests that coil embolisation is efficacious in obliterating
unruptured intracranial aneurysms and that its safety is similar to that of surgical
treatment.
1.2 The annual risk of haemorrhage from unruptured intracranial aneurysms varies
widely, depending on their site and size; and the lifetime risk depends on life
expectancy and other factors. The decision to treat unruptured intracranial
aneurysms by coil embolisation therefore requires judgement of the risks for each
patient, and recognition of the importance of patient choice. Clinicians wishing to
undertake this procedure should ensure that:
• normal arrangements are in place for audit and clinical governance
• patients understand the relative risks of coil embolisation and surgery
compared to the risk of having no treatment when giving their consent for
this treatment. Use of NICE's information for the public on coil embolisation
of unruptured cranial aneurysms is recommended.
1.3 The procedure should only be performed in specialist units with expertise in the
endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms.
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Intracranial aneurysms are small balloon-like dilated portions of blood vessels
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 3 ---
Coil embolisation of unruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG105)
that may occasionally rupture, causing haemorrhage, stroke or death. Usually, the
cause is unknown, but people with genetic causes of weak blood vessels are
more likely to develop aneurysms.
2.1.2 The traditional treatment for ruptured or unruptured aneurysms involves open
surgery to clip the abnormal blood vessels inside the skull.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 The coil technique involves approaching the aneurysm from inside the diseased
blood vessel, thereby avoiding the need to open the skull. A thin tube containing
the coil on a guidewire is inserted into a large artery, usually in the groin, and
passed up into the skull under radiological guidance. The coil is placed inside the
aneurysm and detached from the guidewire. Once in position, it causes clotting
and stops blood from entering the aneurysm. Multiple coils may be inserted into
the aneurysm through the same tube until the aneurysm is filled with coils.
2.2.2 The coil technique is mainly carried out on ruptured aneurysms but may also be
used to treat unruptured aneurysms.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 In a large observational study, it was reported that overall morbidity and mortality
associated with endovascular repair was 9% (41/451) at 1 year after having the
procedure, compared with 12% (233/1917) for surgery. Similar results were
reported in smaller studies comparing the two techniques. However, these
comparisons are difficult because patient characteristics differed between the
two groups; for example, those who underwent endovascular repair were often
older than those who had surgery.
2.3.2 For the patients undergoing endovascular repair by coil embolisation in the
International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms, obliteration was
complete in 55% (207/379) of patients, incomplete in 24% (91/379), unsuccessful
in 18% (67/379), and unknown in 3% (12/379) of patients. At 1 year after the
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 4 ---
Coil embolisation of unruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG105)
procedure, less than 1% of patients (4/451) had a moderate or severe disability,
as measured by the Rankin score. In other studies on this procedure, the rate of
permanent complications ranged from 5% (6/116) to 8% (3/38). For more details,
refer to the Sources of evidence section.
2.3.3 The Specialist Advisors considered that the main uncertainty related to the long-
term durability of the procedure.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 In a retrospective study of 62 patients, the procedure-related complication rate
was 23% (14/62) after coil embolisation. Major complications resulting in reduced
functional status were reported in five patients (8%) and minor complications
causing prolonged hospitalisation were reported in nine patients (15%). Adverse
events during initial and follow-up hospitalisation included intra- or postoperative
rupture (6%, 4/62 patients) and cranial neuropathy (11%, 7/62 patients). For more
details, refer to the Sources of evidence section.
2.4.2 In the large observational study, perioperative haemorrhage was noted in 2% (10/
451) and cerebral infarction in 6% (26/451) of patients who underwent
endovascular repair.
2.4.3 The Specialist Advisors considered that this was a safe procedure. One Advisor
noted that complications during the procedure include rupture of the aneurysm or
thrombo-embolic occlusion of intracranial vessels, but these complications are
uncommon. There is also a small risk of delayed haemorrhage from the aneurysm.
3 Further information
3.1 This guidance relates to unruptured aneurysms, see also NICE's interventional
procedures guidance on the use of coil embolisation for ruptured intracranial
aneurysms.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 5 ---
Coil embolisation of unruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG105)
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the interventional procedures advisory committee is
described in the overview for this guidance.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3985-5
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
