=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "coil-embolisation-of-ruptured-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899862981158085.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:01.914676",
  "file_size_bytes": 56549,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/coil-embolisation-of-ruptured-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899862981158085.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Coil embolisation of ruptured
intracranial aneurysms
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 26 January 2005
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg106
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of coil embolisation of
ruptured intracranial aneurysms appears adequate to support use of the
procedure, provided that normal arrangements are in place for consent,
audit and clinical governance.
1.2 The procedure should only be performed in specialist units with
expertise in the endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms. Clear
arrangements should be in place for the involvement of different clinical
disciplines in treatment and follow-up.
1.3 Patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage should have rapid access to
appropriate specialist care.

Coil embolisation of ruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG106)
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Intracranial aneurysms are small balloon-like dilated portions of blood
vessels that may occasionally rupture, causing haemorrhage, stroke or
death. Usually the cause is unknown but people with genetic causes of
weak blood vessels are more likely to develop aneurysms. Rupture of
intracranial aneurysms causes subarachnoid haemorrhage and has a
poor prognosis. About 30% of people die within 24 hours and a further
25–30% die within 4 weeks.
2.1.2 The alternative treatment for ruptured intracranial aneurysm involves
open surgery to clip the aneurysm inside the skull.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 The coil technique involves approaching the aneurysm from inside the
diseased blood vessel, thereby avoiding the need to open the skull. A
thin tube containing the coil on a guidewire is inserted into a large artery,
usually in the groin, and passed up into the skull under radiological
guidance. The coil is placed inside the aneurysm and detached from the
guidewire. Once in position, it causes clotting and stops blood from
entering the aneurysm. Multiple coils may be inserted into the aneurysm
through the same tube until the aneurysm is filled with coils.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 Use of the procedure was supported by a high-quality randomised
controlled trial. In the trial, 'dependency' reflected a moderate to severe
disability as defined by the modified Rankin score. The trial showed a 7%
absolute risk reduction in dependency or death for patients treated with
coils compared with patients treated by surgical clipping. For more
details, refer to the Sources of evidence section.
2.3.2 The Specialist Advisors stated that, in the short term, the procedure is

Coil embolisation of ruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG106)
more effective clinically than surgical clipping. However, the long-term
durability of coil embolisation has not been established.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 Complications associated with the procedure included perforation of the
aneurysm, intracranial haematoma and re-bleeding. In a case series of
403 patients, aneurysm perforation was observed in 11 patients (3%) and
cerebral clot embolisation in 10 patients (2%). Coil migration occurred in
two patients (0.5%). For more details, refer to the Sources of evidence
section.
2.4.2 The Specialist Advisors considered this procedure to be safer than
surgical clipping. They stated that procedural mortality and stroke were
the main adverse events. They also stated that there is a small risk of re-
bleeding, and that this should be monitored over the long term.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 Currently, evidence on the procedure's long-term results is limited to a
mean follow-up of 3.7 years.
3 Further information
3.1 This guidance relates to ruptured intracranial aneurysms. See also
published separate NICE guidance on the use of coil embolisation for
unruptured intracranial aneurysms.
3.2 In 2002, the Royal College of Physicians published guidelines on the
management of stroke, including subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview to this guidance.

Coil embolisation of ruptured intracranial aneurysms (IPG106)
Information for patients
NICE has produced information on this procedure for patients and carers ('Understanding
NICE guidance'). It explains the nature of the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE,
and has been written with patient consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3986-2
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
