=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "cyanoacrylate-glue-occlusion-for-varicose-veins-pdf-1899874278255301.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:20.688999",
  "file_size_bytes": 58286,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/cyanoacrylate-glue-occlusion-for-varicose-veins-pdf-1899874278255301.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for
varicose veins
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 4 March 2020
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg670
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 2 ---
Cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for varicose veins (IPG670)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG526.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Evidence on the safety and efficacy of cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for
varicose veins is adequate to support the use of this procedure provided
that standard arrangements are in place for clinical governance, consent
and audit. Find out what standard arrangements mean on the NICE
interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 The procedure should only be done by clinicians with appropriate
training in this procedure and experience in the use of venous
ultrasound.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Varicose veins are a sign of underlying venous insufficiency. Primary
valvular incompetence is the most common underlying cause of varicose
veins. The saphenous veins are the most frequently affected vessels.
Most people with varicose veins have no symptoms, but venous
insufficiency may cause fatigue, heaviness, aching, throbbing, itching
and cramps in the legs. Chronic venous insufficiency can lead to skin
discoloration, inflammatory dermatitis and ulceration.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 3 ---
Cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for varicose veins (IPG670)
Current treatments
2.2 NICE's guideline describes the diagnosis and management of varicose
veins. Interventional treatment options include endothermal ablation
(such as radiofrequency ablation and endovenous laser ablation
therapy), foam sclerotherapy, mechanochemical ablation and surgery
(usually stripping and ligation of the great and small saphenous veins,
and phlebectomies).
The procedure
2.3 Cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for varicose veins aims to close the veins
by adherence then fibrosis of the lumen, without the need for tumescent
anaesthesia and with reduced need for postoperative compression
therapy.
2.4 The procedure is done using local anaesthesia. An introducer sheath is
inserted into the distal great saphenous vein and, using ultrasound
guidance, a delivery catheter is advanced into position before the
saphenofemoral junction. The proximal vein is compressed, and medical
glue is delivered in measured doses through the tip of the catheter to
seal the vein.
2.5 This is repeated at different positions as the catheter is withdrawn, using
ultrasound imaging to monitor the procedure. The procedure may also be
done in a similar way for the small saphenous vein.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and
safety of this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature
search and detailed review of the evidence from 14 sources, which was
discussed by the committee. The evidence included 2 systematic
reviews, 3 randomised controlled trials, 3 non-randomised comparative
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 4 ---
Cyanoacrylate glue occlusion for varicose veins (IPG670)
studies, 4 case series and 2 case reports. It is presented in table 2 of the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the
appendix of the overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: saphenous vein occlusion rate, recanalisation, symptom
relief and quality of life.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: hypersensitivity, granuloma formation,
thromboembolism, and nerve injury or paraesthesia.
3.4 Three commentaries from patients who have had this procedure were
discussed by the committee.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee was informed that the incidence of hypersensitivity
reactions was reported to be about 7% and granuloma formation was
rare.
3.6 The committee was informed that there are different products available
for this procedure.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3686-1
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
