=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "dabigatran-etexilate-for-the-prevention-of-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82600439457733.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:30.611069",
  "file_size_bytes": 196282,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/dabigatran-etexilate-for-the-prevention-of-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82600439457733.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Dabigatran etexilate for the
prevention of stroke and
systemic embolism in atrial
fibrillation
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 15 March 2012
Last updated: 2 July 2021
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta249

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
This guidance should be read in conjunction with NG196.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Dabigatran etexilate is recommended as an option for the prevention of stroke
and systemic embolism within its licensed indication, that is, in people with non-
valvular atrial fibrillation with 1 or more of the following risk factors:
• previous stroke, transient ischaemic attack or systemic embolism
• left ventricular ejection fraction below 40%
• symptomatic heart failure of New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 2 or
above
• age 75 years or older
• age 65 years or older with 1 of the following: diabetes mellitus, coronary
artery disease or hypertension.
1.2 Decide whether to start treatment with dabigatran etexilate after an informed
discussion with the person about its risks and benefits compared with warfarin,
apixaban, edoxaban and rivaroxaban. For people taking warfarin, consider the
potential risks and benefits of switching to dabigatran etexilate taking into
account their level of international normalised ratio (INR) control.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
2 The technology
2.1 Dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa, Boehringer Ingelheim; hereafter referred to as
dabigatran) is an orally administered anticoagulant that inhibits the thrombin
enzyme. Dabigatran has a UK marketing authorisation for the 'prevention of
stroke and systemic embolism in adult patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation
with 1 or more of the following risk factors:
• previous stroke, transient ischaemic attack, or systemic embolism
• left ventricular ejection fraction below 40%
• symptomatic heart failure of New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 2 or
above
• age 75 years or over
• age 65 years or over with 1 of the following: diabetes mellitus, coronary
artery disease, or hypertension'.
2.2 The summary of product characteristics states that the recommended daily dose
of dabigatran is 300 mg taken as one 150-mg capsule twice daily. Therapy is
continued long term. For patients aged 75 to 80 years, a dose of 220 mg taken as
one 110-mg capsule twice daily can be considered at the discretion of the
physician for individual patients whose thromboembolic risk is low and bleeding
risk is high. Patients aged 80 years or older should be treated with a daily dose of
220 mg taken as one 110-mg capsule twice daily because of the increased risk of
bleeding in this population.
2.3 Dabigatran is contraindicated in people with severe renal impairment, active
clinically significant bleeding, organic lesions at risk of bleeding, impairment of
haemostasis, and hepatic impairment or liver disease expected to have an impact
on survival. Concomitant treatment with systemic ketoconazole, cyclosporine,
itraconazole or tacrolimus is also contraindicated. The most common adverse
events in people receiving dabigatran are anaemia, abdominal pain, diarrhoea,
dyspepsia, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, genitourinary haemorrhage (patients
may notice blood in their urine), nausea and nose bleeds. For full details of

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
adverse reactions and contraindications, see the summary of product
characteristics.
2.4 Dabigatran is available as 110 mg and 150 mg capsules and comes in packs of
60 capsules. The manufacturer has stated that the cost to the NHS of a pack of
60 capsules of either dabigatran 110 mg or 150 mg will be £75.60 (excluding
VAT). The cost per day per patient based on the recommended dosage will be
£2.52 (excluding VAT). Costs may vary in different settings because of negotiated
procurement discounts.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
3 The manufacturer's submission
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by the manufacturer of
dabigatran and a review of this submission by the Evidence Review Group (ERG).
3.1 The manufacturer's submission included 3 trials that directly compared
dabigatran with dose-adjusted warfarin: RE-LY, PETRO and 1160.49. The PETRO
and 1160.49 trials were both dose-finding studies with safety data collection as
the primary objective. The main evidence for clinical effectiveness presented in
the manufacturer's submission was based on the RE-LY randomised controlled
trial.
3.2 RE-LY was a non-inferiority trial in which 2 blinded doses of dabigatran (110 mg
twice daily and 150 mg twice daily) were compared with open-label warfarin
(with a target international normalised ratio [INR] of 2.0 to 3.0) for the prevention
of stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and
at least 1 additional risk factor for stroke. The RE-LY trial included people with
documented atrial fibrillation and at least 1 of the following additional risk factors:
history of stroke, transient ischaemic attack, or systemic embolism; left
ventricular ejection fraction of less than 40%; symptomatic heart failure; age
75 years or older; age 65 years or older with diabetes mellitus, documented
coronary artery disease or hypertension. People were excluded from the RE-LY
trial if they had a severe, disabling stroke in the previous 6 months or any stroke
within the previous 14 days, conditions associated with increased risk of
bleeding, or a contraindication to warfarin treatment.
3.3 The RE-LY study took place in 44 countries including the UK and a total of
18,113 people were randomised across the 3 treatment arms in a 1:1:1 ratio.
People recruited into the study were randomised within 14 days of the screening
visit and were randomly allocated to dabigatran 110 mg twice daily (n=6,015),
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily (n=6,076) or warfarin (n=6,022). Minimum follow-
up was 1 year, and median follow-up was 23.7 months. The mean age of people
in the study was 71.5 years and 63.6% were male. Risk of stroke at baseline was
classified according to CHADS score, which is used to estimate the risk of stroke
2
in people with atrial fibrillation to determine whether they need anticoagulation
treatment. The score was calculated by giving 1 point each for the presence of

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
congestive heart failure, hypertension or diabetes mellitus, and age 75 years or
older. Two points were given if people had already had an ischaemic stroke or
transient ischaemic attack.
3.4 The primary outcome in the study was incidence of all types of stroke (including
haemorrhagic stroke) or systemic embolism. To show non-inferiority in the RE-LY
trial, the upper limits of the confidence interval (CI) of the hazard ratio (HR) for
dabigatran versus warfarin had to be less than the margin specified. Two margins
were used in the manufacturer's submission, 1.46 and 1.38, of which 1.38 was
specified as the preferred margin of non-inferiority by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).
3.5 The reduction in relative risk of stroke or systemic embolism compared with
warfarin was 10% for dabigatran 110 mg and 35% for dabigatran 150 mg.
Dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was associated with a lower incidence of stroke or
systemic embolism compared with warfarin and this was statistically significant
(HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.52 to 0.81). A statistically significant beneficial effect of
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was also demonstrated in terms of a reduced
incidence of ischaemic stroke (HR 0.75, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.97) and vascular
mortality (HR 0.85, 95% CI 0.72 to 0.99). A reduction in all-cause mortality was
also observed and, although it did not reach statistical significance, it showed
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily to be non-inferior to warfarin (HR 0.88, 95% CI
0.77 to 1.00). There were no statistically significant differences between
dabigatran 110 mg twice daily and warfarin in the incidence of stroke or systemic
embolism, ischaemic stroke or vascular mortality. Both doses of dabigatran were
associated with an increased risk of acute myocardial infarction compared with
warfarin but this was not statistically significant (HR 1.29, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.75
[110 mg twice daily]; HR 1.27, 95% CI 0.94 to 1.71 [150 mg twice daily]).
3.6 The manufacturer's submission included post hoc subgroup analyses of people
older and younger than 80 years of age. In both age groups, there were no
statistically significant differences between either dose of dabigatran and
warfarin in the incidence of ischaemic stroke, systemic embolism and myocardial
infarction. However, the manufacturer did report a statistically significant
reduction in the incidence of transient ischaemic attack (HR 0.45, 95% CI 0.23 to
0.89) in people older than 80 years receiving dabigatran 110 mg twice daily,
compared with warfarin.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
3.7 The manufacturer's submission reported results from pre-planned subgroup
analyses of people naive to vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin (defined as
treatment for 2 months or less in a person's lifetime) and people who have
previously used vitamin K antagonists (defined as treatment for more than
2 months during a person's lifetime). In both groups, dabigatran 150 mg twice
daily was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the incidence of
stroke or systemic embolism compared with warfarin (HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.46 to
0.87 [vitamin K antagonist-naive group] and HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.49 to 0.89
[vitamin K antagonist-experienced group]). No statistically significant differences
were reported for the lower, 110 mg twice daily, dose of dabigatran compared
with warfarin.
3.8 For adverse events, the manufacturer reported a statistically significant reduction
in the incidence of haemorrhagic stroke for both doses of dabigatran compared
with warfarin (HR 0.31, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.56 [dabigatran 110 mg twice daily] and
HR 0.26, 95% CI 0.14 to 0.49 [dabigatran 150 mg twice daily]). Both doses of
dabigatran were also associated with statistically significantly fewer life-
threatening bleeds compared with warfarin (HR 0.67, 95% CI 0.54 to 0.82
[dabigatran 110 mg twice daily] and HR 0.80, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.98 [dabigatran
150 mg twice daily]). Both doses of dabigatran were associated with fewer cases
of intracranial haemorrhage (including haemorrhagic stroke) than warfarin (HR
0.30, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.45 [dabigatran 110 mg twice daily]; HR 0.41, 95% CI 0.28 to
0.61 [dabigatran 150 mg twice daily]). Treatment with dabigatran 110 mg was also
associated with a statistically significant reduction in major bleeding compared
with warfarin. In contrast, both doses of dabigatran were associated with a
significantly higher rate of gastrointestinal bleeding compared with warfarin (HR
1.35, 95% CI 1.19 to 1.53 [dabigatran 110 mg twice daily] and HR 1.52, 95% CI 1.35
to 1.72 [dabigatran 150 mg twice daily]). Dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was
associated with a significantly higher incidence of major gastrointestinal bleeding
(HR 1.47, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.85) and life-threatening gastrointestinal bleeding (HR
1.62, 95% CI 1.17 to 2.26). The manufacturer reported that more people in the
dabigatran groups discontinued the study drug (22.0% in the dabigatran 110 mg
twice daily group and 22.8% in the dabigatran 150 mg twice daily group),
compared with those on warfarin (17.9%). More people in the dabigatran groups
also discontinued study medication because of outcome events; however,
discontinuations caused by major bleeds were similar for all treatments.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
3.9 The manufacturer reported a statistically significant reduction in the incidence of
haemorrhagic stroke in the post hoc subgroup analyses of people younger than
80 years compared with warfarin for both doses of dabigatran (HR 0.33, 95% CI
0.16 to 0.65 [dabigatran 110 mg twice daily]; HR 0.21, 95% CI 0.09 to 0.47
[dabigatran 150 mg twice daily]) and in people older than 80 years receiving
dabigatran 110 mg twice daily (HR 0.26, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.91). However, the
reduction in incidence of haemorrhagic stroke in people older than 80 years for
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily compared with warfarin was not statistically
significant (HR 0.93, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.07).
3.10 Health-related quality-of-life data were collected in a sub-study of the RE-LY trial
(1440 of the 18,113 people enrolled in the RE-LY study completed the EQ-5D
questionnaire as part of the quality-of-life sub-study). The manufacturer reported
that the sub-study was reasonably representative of the overall RE-LY population
with patients having similar demographic and disease characteristics. The
manufacturer stated that analysing the EQ-5D data for specific events of interest
was not possible and the quality-of-life sub-study was unable to provide utility
values for event-driven health states to use in the economic model. However,
background utility values could be derived from the quality-of-life sub-study for
people being treated with warfarin and dabigatran, the details of which are
academic-in-confidence and are not reported here.
3.11 The manufacturer performed a mixed-treatment comparison of dabigatran,
aspirin monotherapy and aspirin plus clopidogrel. The treatments considered by
the manufacturer to be relevant in this analysis were dabigatran 150 mg twice
daily, dabigatran 110 mg twice daily, dose-adjusted warfarin, aspirin, aspirin plus
clopidogrel, and placebo. An additional sequential regimen of dabigatran was
used in the mixed-treatment comparison. This was intended to reflect the use of
dabigatran according to the licensed regimen which is 150 mg twice daily in
people up to the age of 80 years, and then 110 mg twice daily in those aged
80 years and older. Results from the RE-LY trial and the mixed-treatment
comparison were very similar for both dabigatran doses compared with dose-
adjusted warfarin.
3.12 The manufacturer's economic evaluation was based on a cost–utility analysis
designed to compare the costs and outcomes of dabigatran with treatments used
in the UK (warfarin, aspirin and aspirin plus clopidogrel). The manufacturer

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
developed a Markov model that used 3 levels of disability (independent,
moderate and severe) and death to define health states. A hypothetical cohort
entered the model at risk of specified clinical events and was on 1 of the
treatments under comparison. They moved between health states when a clinical
event occurred and their disability status changed. The clinical events considered
were ischaemic stroke, intracranial haemorrhage, haemorrhagic stroke,
extracranial haemorrhage, systemic embolism, transient ischaemic attack and
acute myocardial infarction. All clinical outcomes were associated with acute
costs and disutility. Further longer-term costs and disutility beyond the acute
stage were associated with ischaemic stroke, haemorrhagic stroke and
intracranial haemorrhage. The model permitted 1 clinical event per 3-month cycle
over a lifetime horizon. The model also allowed for a switch to second-line
treatment or a discontinuation of treatment.
3.13 The manufacturer presented 2 economic models: a single-dose model and a
sequential regimen model. In the single-dose model, the cohort with atrial
fibrillation received either 110 mg twice daily or 150 mg twice daily throughout
their treatment. In the sequential regimen model, the cohort was divided by age
and modelled separately. The model for people younger than 80 years assumed
that treatment began with dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, and switched to
dabigatran 110 mg twice daily when the age of 80 years was reached. The model
for people aged 80 years or older at baseline assumed a dose of dabigatran
110 mg twice daily throughout. Therefore, the sequential regimen model resulted
in 2 sets of outputs: a sequential regimen model for people starting treatment
younger than 80 years (incorporating a life-time horizon including the switch to
110 mg twice daily at 80 years) and a sequential regimen model for those starting
treatment at 80 years or older.
3.14 The event risk for all treatment strategies was applied to the baseline risk of
events in people treated with warfarin in the RE-LY trial. Therefore, treatment
effects were converted into relative risks and applied to the warfarin arm of the
RE-LY trial. The relative risks for the various clinical events while on treatment
with dabigatran 110 mg twice daily and 150 mg twice daily were obtained from
the RE-LY trial. In the sequential regimen model, the relative risks were derived
from the post hoc subgroup analyses of people older and younger than 80 years
of age. The relative risks for aspirin, aspirin plus clopidogrel and placebo were
obtained from the mixed-treatment comparison.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
3.15 The manufacturer's economic evaluation focused on health-related quality of life
associated with disability and disutility caused by the various clinical events. The
baseline utility value for people with atrial fibrillation in the base-case analyses
was taken from the RE-LY quality-of-life sub-study. Utility values associated with
clinical events and disability status were derived from published sources.
3.16 The manufacturer's model considered resource costs associated with anti-
thrombotic treatment, acute event costs, and long-term follow-up costs resulting
from disability. These costs were derived from the national payment by results
tariff, systematic reviews and a manufacturer-sponsored study based on the
Oxford Vascular study (OXVASC) cohort. The cost of dabigatran was £2.52
(excluding VAT) per day for either the 110 mg twice daily or 150 mg twice daily
doses. Treatment with warfarin, aspirin and aspirin plus clopidogrel was assumed
to cost £0.04, £0.09, and £0.26 per day, respectively. Treatment with dabigatran
was not considered to need any monitoring, but the cost of INR monitoring for
warfarin was estimated to be £414.90 per annum. The model assumed an NHS
perspective and costs and benefits were discounted at 3.5% per annum.
3.17 The manufacturer reported pairwise cost-effectiveness results for dabigatran
compared with warfarin. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) for the
dabigatran sequential regimen in which people started treatment when younger
than 80 years and continued for the rest of their lives, and the sequential regimen
in which people started treatment when older than 80 years were £7,314 and
£7,873 per QALY gained respectively, compared with warfarin. The ICERs for
dabigatran 150 mg and 110 mg twice daily compared with warfarin were £6,264
and £18,691 per QALY gained respectively.
3.18 The manufacturer performed structural, univariate and probabilistic sensitivity
analyses to reflect uncertainty in the model inputs and assumptions. The
structural sensitivity analysis explored the cost effectiveness of dabigatran by
varying INR cost (±25%), time horizon (2, 10 and 15 years), and discount rate (0
to 6%). The cost effectiveness of dabigatran was highly sensitive to the time
horizon specified. A 2-year time horizon resulted in ICERs of £75,891 and
£23,403 per QALY gained, respectively, for the dabigatran sequential regimen in
people starting treatment when younger than 80 years and the dabigatran
sequential regimen in people starting treatment when older than 80 years,
compared with warfarin. For dabigatran 150 mg and 110 mg twice daily, the ICERs

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
were £75,601 and £108,736 per QALY gained, respectively.
3.19 In the univariate sensitivity analysis, the cost effectiveness of the dabigatran
sequential regimen in people starting treatment when younger than 80 years was
most sensitive to risk of ischaemic stroke. Setting the relative risk for ischaemic
stroke to the 95% upper confidence limits increased the base-case ICER
compared with warfarin from £7,314 to £17,100 per QALY gained. The cost
effectiveness of the dabigatran sequential regimen in people starting treatment
when older than 80 years was most sensitive to risk of ischaemic stroke and high
baseline CHADS scores. Setting the relative risks for ischaemic stroke to the
2
95% upper confidence limits increased the base-case ICER for the dabigatran
sequential regimen in people older than 80 years compared with warfarin from
£7,873 to £46,509 per QALY gained. The ICER for the dabigatran sequential
regimen in people starting treatment when older than 80 years compared with
warfarin increased from the base-case estimate of £7,873 to £21,129 per QALY
gained for a group with a CHADS score of 5. The ICER for dabigatran 150 mg
2
twice daily compared with warfarin was robust to the parameters and ranges
tested by the manufacturer, and the highest ICER was £10,234 per QALY gained.
The cost effectiveness of dabigatran 110 mg twice daily in relation to warfarin
was highly sensitive to high baseline CHADS scores, risk of ischaemic stroke and
2
risk of intracranial haemorrhage.
3.20 In the probabilistic sensitivity analysis, the ICERs for the dabigatran sequential
regimens in people starting treatment when younger than 80 years and in people
starting treatment when older than 80 years compared with warfarin were £7,811
and £11,912 per QALY gained respectively. The probabilistic ICERs for dabigatran
150 mg and 110 mg twice daily compared with warfarin were £7,940 and £15,867
per QALY gained respectively.
3.21 The ERG noted that the manufacturer's submission included 2 generally well-
conducted systematic reviews: the first was of dabigatran trials in the relevant
indication, and the second was of all potentially relevant pharmacological
interventions for the prevention of stroke in people with atrial fibrillation. The ERG
commented that the RE-LY trial was of good quality and that the manufacturer
appropriately concentrated on the results from this trial. The ERG highlighted the
limitations of non-inferiority trials, such as establishing the non-inferiority margin
and the population on which to base analyses. Overall, the ERG felt that adequate

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
measures were taken by the manufacturer to reduce the impact of potential bias
associated with non-inferiority trials.
3.22 The ERG commented that the results of the RE-LY trial showed both doses of
dabigatran to be non-inferior to dose-adjusted warfarin in the prevention of
stroke or systemic embolism. The ERG noted that a submission from the
manufacturer to the FDA indicated that dabigatran 150 mg twice daily reduced
the risk of stroke or systemic embolism compared with warfarin in people with
good INR control (HR 0.68, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.92 for time in therapeutic INR range
65% or above; HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.51 to 0.96 for time in therapeutic INR range 68%
or above). The ERG also highlighted that an analysis in the submission produced
for the FDA showed a greater benefit of dabigatran in people with poor INR
control than in those whose INR was well controlled (the threshold being the
centre-level median of 67%). The FDA report concluded that, although the results
showed efficacy of dabigatran in people who had INR control above the centre-
level median, the results did not show superiority over warfarin. The submission
further subdivided people by INR control (less than 58.5%, 58.5% or above, less
than 66.8%, 66.8% or above, and less than 74.2%). This demonstrated that the
greatest benefit of dabigatran was in the lowest quartile of INR control and that,
in people with good INR control with warfarin, little or no additional benefit in
terms of effectiveness would be gained with dabigatran.
3.23 A key uncertainty highlighted by the ERG was the generalisability of the results to
people with atrial fibrillation in the NHS. The ERG commented that the definition
of moderate or high risk of stroke or systemic embolism in the manufacturer's
submission differed slightly to the definition in NICE's original guideline on atrial
fibrillation (now replaced by NICE's guideline on atrial fibrillation). The ERG
commented that the population in the manufacturer's submission seemed to be
at higher risk of stroke because the definition of moderate risk included those
aged 75 years and over with no additional risk factors, whereas NICE's previous
guideline on atrial fibrillation defined moderate risk as people aged 65 years and
over with no additional risk factors. The ERG commented that including the
potentially large subgroup of people over 65 years with atrial fibrillation but with
no other risk factors for stroke would have been useful, and would reflect NICE's
previous guideline on atrial fibrillation more closely and reduce the overall risk
level of the population. The clinical specialists advising the ERG noted that the
threshold for treatment with warfarin seems to be decreasing, therefore

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
decreasing the risk of stroke in the eligible atrial fibrillation population, making the
population in the RE-LY trial less representative of clinical practice over time.
3.24 The ERG commented that the general approach taken by the manufacturer to
estimate lifetime cost effectiveness was appropriate and met the requirements of
the NICE reference case. The ERG noted that the model included most of the
relevant clinical events in atrial fibrillation; however, pulmonary embolism was not
included in the model. The ERG commented that excluding pulmonary embolism
is potentially an optimistic approach in favour of dabigatran because dabigatran
is associated with higher rates of pulmonary embolism than warfarin.
3.25 The ERG noted that, although the manufacturer's submission considered the
atrial fibrillation population to be heterogeneous, reflected by the distribution of
CHADS scores, the manufacturer assumed that all people would be treated the
2
same. The ERG commented that this may be an over-simplification of the
decision problem and does not allow the potential impact of clinical heterogeneity
on cost effectiveness to be considered.
3.26 The ERG highlighted that acute myocardial infarction and systemic embolism
were assumed by the manufacturer to be associated with acute costs and
disutility, but not with any ongoing or long-term consequences. The ERG
considered this assumption to be over-simplistic and that the effect of including
long-term consequences of acute myocardial infarction and systemic embolism
on the cost effectiveness of dabigatran is uncertain. The ERG commented that
dabigatran was associated with higher discontinuation rates than warfarin in the
first 2 years of the trial, which could suggest that people tend to tolerate warfarin
better than dabigatran.
3.27 The 2 main weaknesses of the manufacturer's model were considered by the ERG
to be related to the sequence of treatments and the cost of anticoagulation
monitoring. The ERG commented that the full set of relevant sequences of
treatment was not fully investigated by the manufacturer. For example, the ERG
considered that starting treatment with dabigatran and subsequently switching
to warfarin would be a reasonable treatment sequence, but the manufacturer's
model assumed that a person could not switch to warfarin if dabigatran was the
first treatment. In addition, the ERG stated that the cost of anticoagulation
monitoring was a key driver of the model in terms of resources and costs, and

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
that it was likely that the average cost of monitoring had been overestimated in
the model, biasing the results in favour of dabigatran. The ERG also highlighted
that its clinical advisers were concerned about the high variability of monitoring
costs in practice. This heterogeneity was not considered in the manufacturer's
submission. The ERG commented that uncertainty around the monitoring costs
was also inadequately modelled in the manufacturer's submission.
3.28 The ERG carried out exploratory cost-effectiveness analyses by subgroups
according to INR control with warfarin. The ICER for dabigatran 150 mg twice
daily compared with warfarin in people with perfect INR control (that is, in target
INR range 100% of the time for the entire duration of treatment) was £60,895 per
QALY gained. Dabigatran 110 mg twice daily was dominated by warfarin because
it was associated with greater costs but lower health benefits. The group of
people with poor INR control was also evaluated by the ERG. The ICER for
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily compared with warfarin for people with an INR
below 2 was £740 per QALY gained. For people with an INR above 3, warfarin
was dominated by dabigatran 150 mg twice daily. The ERG did not include
pairwise cost-effectiveness results for dabigatran in the sequential regimen
compared with warfarin. The ERG concluded that INR control is a key parameter
in the economic evaluation.
3.29 The ERG used 3 approaches to calculate the variable costs of INR monitoring,
which it considered had been overestimated in the manufacturer's model. The
alternative costs used by the ERG were £279.36, £241.54 and £115.14, instead of
£414.90 as assumed by the manufacturer. Adjusting the model to test each
individual cost assumption increased the ICER for dabigatran 150 mg twice daily
compared with warfarin to £10,528, £11,720 and £15,701 per QALY gained
respectively.
3.30 The ERG considered that the disutility of dabigatran captured by the RE-LY
quality-of-life sub-study had not been fully reflected in the manufacturer's cost-
effectiveness analysis. The disutility associated with dabigatran treatment was
tested by the ERG but it did not change the overall conclusions about the cost
effectiveness of this intervention.
3.31 The ERG commented that treatment with dabigatran was associated with an
increased incidence of dyspepsia compared with warfarin treatment, but that the

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
model assumed that the cost of dyspepsia was only accrued in the first cycle.
The ERG considered that a more conservative approach would be to assume that
costs of dyspepsia continue throughout treatment. This caused the ICER for
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily compared with warfarin to increase slightly from
£6,262 per QALY to £6,659 per QALY gained.
3.32 The ERG highlighted that disability and mortality risk after stroke is considered to
be treatment dependent in the manufacturer's model. Therefore, the ERG
explored the model assuming that disability caused by stroke is independent of
treatment. The ICER for dabigatran 150 mg twice daily compared with warfarin
increased from £6,262 to £8,393 per QALY gained.
3.33 The ERG presented analyses using an alternative set of assumptions to those
provided by the manufacturer. The ERG's alternative base case assumed:
• A patient cohort representing people with atrial fibrillation in the UK, using
the data reported by Gallagher et al. (2008).
• The variable (per patient) costs of anticoagulant monitoring are £115.14.
• People have dyspepsia throughout dabigatran treatment, not just in the first
3 months of treatment.
• Disability and mortality risks after stroke are treatment independent.
• Disutility associated with dabigatran during the first 12 months of treatment
as used in the RE-LY quality-of-life sub-study (the details are academic-in-
confidence).
3.34 By introducing these assumptions, the ICER for dabigatran 150 mg twice daily
compared with warfarin increased from £6,264 to £24,173 per QALY gained in the
ERG's alternative base-case analysis.
Manufacturer's additional analyses
3.35 Additional analyses were provided by the manufacturer in response to NICE's
request for further clarification on the cost effectiveness of dabigatran presented

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
in the appraisal consultation document. The manufacturer submitted a revised
cost-effectiveness analysis of the sequential regimen model comparing
dabigatran with warfarin using relative risks from the whole RE-LY trial population
rather than from the post hoc subgroup analysis, as requested by the Committee.
Given the uncertainty about costs of warfarin prescription and monitoring
because of wide variations in local practice, it also conducted sensitivity analyses
that varied the annual cost of INR monitoring (£115.14, £241.54, £279.36 and
£414.90) and explored the ERG's preferred assumptions (see section 3.33).
3.36 The manufacturer highlighted that its new base-case analysis included INR costs
of £241.54. The manufacturer selected this cost based on the conclusions of the
first Appraisal Committee meeting, which stated that the real cost of INR
monitoring was likely to lie between the ERG's lower estimate of £115.14 and the
manufacturer's upper estimate of £414.90. Assuming an INR monitoring cost of
£241.54, the manufacturer's revised base-case ICERs were £14,518 per QALY
gained for the dabigatran sequential regimen in people starting treatment when
younger than 80 years and £18,269 per QALY gained for the sequential regimen
in people starting treatment at 80 years and older, compared with warfarin.
3.37 In response to the Committee's request to include a patient cohort that better
reflected people with atrial fibrillation in the UK, the manufacturer highlighted that
data from Gallagher et al. (2008) were not easily adapted to the model and that
many of the patients included in the Gallagher analysis would not be covered by
the marketing authorisation for dabigatran. To address the Committee's request
the manufacturer performed an analysis of the General Practice Research
Database to derive data required for the model. Applying these data increased
the ICERs to £17,373 and £19,680 per QALY gained for the dabigatran sequential
regimen in people starting treatment when younger than 80 years and at
80 years and older respectively, compared with warfarin. The manufacturer
stated that applying the ERG's preferred assumptions relating to dyspepsia
management costs, disability and mortality risks, and disutility associated with
dabigatran (see section 3.33) individually had minimal effect on the base-case
ICER. Combining an INR monitoring cost of £241.54 with the ERG's preferred
assumptions resulted in ICERs of £17,660 and £18,392 per QALY gained for the
sequential regimen in people starting treatment when younger than 80 years and
people starting treatment at 80 years and older respectively, compared with
warfarin.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
3.38 The manufacturer also responded to the Committee's request in the appraisal
consultation document for further comment and consideration of the cost
effectiveness of dabigatran in the subgroup of people whose condition is already
well controlled on warfarin. The manufacturer highlighted that the INR control
analyses submitted to the FDA (see section 3.22) were stratified by time in
therapeutic range only in the warfarin arm and should therefore be interpreted
with caution. The manufacturer stated that analyses presented in a study by
Wallentin et al. (2010), which was stratified on treatment centre time in
therapeutic range (a method that maintains randomisation within a centre), would
be more relevant if such an analysis were to be carried out. The manufacturer
highlighted that the ERG's initial analysis of good INR control (see section 3.28)
assumed a time in therapeutic range of 100%, which is unlikely to be achieved in
clinical practice for most patients. The manufacturer further explained that for
both the full sequential regimen in people starting treatment younger than
80 years and the over 80 cohort, INR would need to be within target range an
average of approximately 83% to 85% of the time for the ICERs to be above
£30,000 per QALY gained compared with warfarin.
3.39 The ERG provided a critique and exploratory analysis of the manufacturer's
additional analyses. The ERG compared inputs in the revised model with inputs
used for the original single-dose and sequential regimen model. It commented
that the values for ischaemic stroke disability and mortality rates by treatment
used in the revised sequential regimen model were the same as those used in the
initial sequential regimen model rather than those from the single-dose model.
The ERG commented that correcting for this had the effect of reducing the
manufacturer's ICERs slightly. The ERG agreed with the manufacturer that the
data presented by Gallagher et al. (2008) are not easily adapted to the model. It
commented that the General Practice Research Database data presented by the
manufacturer have advantages over the Gallagher study in that they are more
recent and therefore more reflective of the current UK atrial fibrillation population,
and they refer solely to the people with atrial fibrillation for whom dabigatran is
licensed. The ERG compared the results of the incremental analyses presented
by the manufacturer with the results obtained by the ERG after including the
correct values for ischaemic stroke disability and mortality rates by treatment and
including all of the assumptions requested by the Committee. The ERG
commented that its results were broadly in line with those presented by the
manufacturer. The ERG's estimate of the ICER for the sequential regimen in

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
people starting treatment when younger than 80 years, including the relative
risks from the whole RE-LY trial population, an INR cost of £241.54 and all of the
assumptions requested by the Committee, was £18,863 per QALY gained
compared with the manufacturer's estimate of £17,660 per QALY gained.
3.40 The ERG acknowledged the manufacturer's view that 100% time in therapeutic
range is difficult to achieve in clinical practice. The ERG identified a UK-based
study by Jones et al. (2005) that reported that the average time in therapeutic
range was 67.9%. The ERG commented that the Jones et al. (2005) study
indicated that the people with the best INR control (upper quartile) were within
therapeutic range an average of 83.7% of the time, so the ERG performed further
exploratory sensitivity analyses testing this value. For the subgroup of patients
whose INR is within range 83.7% of the time, the ICER for dabigatran compared
with warfarin was £46,989 per QALY gained assuming INR monitoring costs of
£241.54 per annum. If the INR costs were increased to £414.90 per annum, the
ICER decreased to £31,386 per QALY gained compared with warfarin. The ERG
commented that it is unclear how INR monitoring costs vary by time in
therapeutic range. The ERG also performed a threshold analysis to estimate the
level of time in therapeutic range needed to raise the ICER above £30,000 per
QALY gained compared with warfarin, assuming an INR monitoring cost of
£241.54 per annum and including all of the ERG's preferred assumptions. The ERG
commented that the INR would need to be within the target range an average of
75% to 76% of the time or more for the ICER to be above £30,000 per QALY
gained compared with warfarin.
3.41 Full details of all the evidence are in the manufacturer's submission and the ERG
report.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of dabigatran, having considered evidence on the nature of atrial
fibrillation and the value placed on the benefits of dabigatran by people with the
condition, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It also took into
account the effective use of NHS resources.
4.2 The Committee heard from the clinical specialists and patient experts that the
current standard treatment for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in
people with atrial fibrillation is warfarin, and that because of its lower efficacy,
aspirin is used only in people for whom warfarin is unsuitable. The Committee
also heard that warfarin, although an effective treatment, is associated with a
number of problems. The main concerns for people with atrial fibrillation were
fear of having a stroke and anxiety about the difficulty of keeping the INR within
the satisfactory therapeutic range. The Committee heard from the patient
experts that stroke is a major concern for people with atrial fibrillation and that
stroke severity is usually greater in this group than in people who have strokes
from other causes. The patient experts also highlighted that many people taking
warfarin are outside their target therapeutic INR range at any 1 time and that
warfarin, unlike dabigatran, is associated with a number of inconveniences that
make adherence difficult. These include numerous food and drug interactions
that can have an impact on people's work, social and family life, and regular
monitoring and dose adjustments that can cause disruption and inconvenience.
The Committee accepted the limitations of warfarin therapy, and the
considerable effect that it may have on the lives of the people who take it, and
recognised the potential benefits of dabigatran for people with atrial fibrillation.
4.3 The Committee considered the clinical-effectiveness data from the RE-LY trial
comparing dabigatran with warfarin. It noted that this formed most of the clinical-
effectiveness evidence in the manufacturer's submission and was the largest
published trial in people with atrial fibrillation. The Committee considered that the
RE-LY trial was of good quality but noted that a key uncertainty highlighted by
the ERG was the generalisability of the results to people diagnosed with atrial
fibrillation in the NHS. The Committee noted that the definition of moderate to
high risk of stroke in the RE-LY trial was different from the definition used in

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
NICE's original guideline on atrial fibrillation (now replaced by NICE's guideline on
atrial fibrillation) and did not include people aged 65 years and over with no
additional risk factors for stroke, resulting in a higher risk profile in the trial than in
the general population eligible for anticoagulation prophylaxis. However, the
Committee was persuaded by the clinical specialists that the RE-LY trial included
a broad range of people that reflected those seen in UK clinical practice and that
the results were applicable to a wide range of people with atrial fibrillation. The
Committee concluded that the population included in the trial was appropriate
and broadly relevant to UK clinical practice.
4.4 The Committee considered the results of the RE-LY trial. It noted that dabigatran
150 mg twice daily was associated with a statistically significantly lower
incidence of stroke or systemic embolism, ischaemic stroke and vascular
mortality compared with warfarin, but that there were no statistically significant
differences in these outcomes between dabigatran 110 mg twice daily and
warfarin. It also noted that both doses of dabigatran were associated with an
increased risk of acute myocardial infarction compared with warfarin but that this
was not statistically significant. The Committee heard from the clinical specialists
that this reflected a small absolute difference in the incidence of acute
myocardial infarction between the treatment groups, but it was unclear whether
this was because of a protective effect of warfarin or a negative effect of
dabigatran treatment, and that the effects did not appear to translate into an
increased vascular mortality risk. The Committee concluded that dabigatran
150 mg twice daily was more clinically effective than warfarin in reducing the risk
of stroke or systemic embolism, ischaemic stroke and vascular mortality and that
this represented an important development for people with atrial fibrillation. It
also concluded that the lower 110 mg dabigatran twice-daily dose had shown
non-inferiority to warfarin.
4.5 The Committee considered the results of the manufacturer's subgroup analyses.
It was aware, however, that the manufacturer's analyses by age had been defined
post hoc and it therefore considered that the results should be interpreted with
caution. The Committee also considered the results of the manufacturer's pre-
planned analyses of people naive to vitamin K antagonists and people who have
previously used vitamin K antagonists. It noted that dabigatran 150 mg twice
daily was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the incidence of
stroke or systemic embolism compared with warfarin in both vitamin K

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
antagonist-naive and vitamin K antagonist-experienced subgroups, but
dabigatran 110 mg twice daily did not show a statistically significant reduction in
either group. The Committee concluded that dabigatran 150 mg twice daily
showed increased efficacy compared with warfarin in people with atrial fibrillation
irrespective of their previous exposure to vitamin K antagonists.
4.6 The Committee discussed the effectiveness of dabigatran compared with
warfarin according to INR control. It noted the evidence presented by the ERG
that people with good INR control with warfarin may not gain additional clinical
benefit by taking dabigatran. However, the clinical specialists emphasised the
importance of the significantly lower rates of intracranial haemorrhage and
haemorrhagic stroke associated with both doses of dabigatran compared with
warfarin in the RE-LY trial, and that this effect is maintained in people with good
INR control. The Committee heard that haemorrhagic stroke and intracranial
haemorrhage have devastating and life-threatening consequences and
concluded that the lower rates associated with dabigatran represent an
important advance in the treatment of atrial fibrillation alongside reduction in
ischaemic stroke. It concluded that this applied to all patients with atrial
fibrillation, including those with good INR control, and that there were also
benefits of taking a treatment that didn't need INR monitoring or dietary
restriction.
4.7 The Committee considered the additional adverse events reported in the RE-LY
trial. It noted that both doses of dabigatran were associated with statistically
significant reductions in the incidence of life-threatening bleeds compared with
warfarin. However, it also noted that the incidence of gastrointestinal bleeding, in
contrast to cerebral haemorrhage, was statistically significantly higher for both
doses of dabigatran, and the comment from the manufacturer that this may be
the result of a local effect of the orally administered drug on the gastrointestinal
mucosa. Dabigatran 150 mg twice daily was associated with a statistically
significantly higher incidence of major and life-threatening gastrointestinal
bleeding. The Committee noted that even small changes in total gastrointestinal
bleeding rates might have a substantial impact on the provision of services and
that major gastrointestinal bleeding is associated with a significant mortality risk.
The Committee concluded that treatment with dabigatran resulted in more
gastrointestinal bleeding than warfarin, but also recognised the particular
importance of the effects of dabigatran on reducing the risk of haemorrhagic

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
stroke and intracranial haemorrhage for people with atrial fibrillation when
compared with warfarin.
4.8 The Committee was aware that health-related quality-of-life data were collected
in a sub-study of the RE-LY trial. It noted that baseline utility values for people
with atrial fibrillation were derived from the sub-study. The Committee agreed
that because the sub-study was reasonably representative of the overall RE-LY
population, this approach was appropriate.
4.9 The Committee considered the manufacturer's economic model and the critique
and exploratory analyses performed by the ERG. The Committee considered the
utility values used in the model and noted that it was unclear how the utility
values relating to the effect of stroke were derived. However, the Committee
agreed with the ERG that the general approach taken by the manufacturer to
estimate the lifetime cost effectiveness of dabigatran was appropriate.
4.10 The Committee noted that the manufacturer presented a single-dose model, and
a sequential regimen model in which people younger than 80 years began
treatment with dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, and at the age of 80 years were
switched to dabigatran 110 mg twice daily. As the summary of product
characteristics for dabigatran excludes people older than 80 years from
treatment with dabigatran 150 mg twice daily because of additional risks in this
group, the Committee concluded that the sequence of dabigatran 150 mg twice
daily followed by dabigatran 110 mg twice daily once people reach 80 years
would be the only regimen appropriate for the assessment of the cost
effectiveness of dabigatran relative to warfarin in the whole eligible UK
population.
4.11 The Committee heard from the ERG that the relative risks used to inform the
manufacturer's original sequential regimen model were derived from people in the
younger than 80 years and older than 80 years subgroups of the RE-LY trial that
were defined post hoc. It also heard that using relative risks from the whole RE-
LY trial population would be more appropriate to determine reliable effectiveness
estimates for the dabigatran sequence. Therefore, the Committee asked the
manufacturer to submit a re-analysis of the data for discussion at the second
Appraisal Committee meeting using the relative risks from the whole RE-LY trial
population.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
4.12 At the first Appraisal Committee meeting, the Committee noted that the ERG had
highlighted a number of uncertainties relating to assumptions used in the
manufacturer's economic model. First, the Committee noted the ERG's view that
an analysis based on an older patient cohort with a lower risk of stroke using data
reported by Gallagher et al. (2008) would be more representative of people with
atrial fibrillation in the UK than the cohort from the RE-LY trial used by the
manufacturer. The Committee accepted that there was uncertainty around which
cohort most realistically reflected the population of people with atrial fibrillation in
the UK.
4.13 Second, the Committee noted that the ERG questioned whether disability and
mortality were independent of the treatment received. The Committee heard from
the clinical specialists that the manufacturer's assumption that a stroke would be
less severe after treatment with dabigatran than warfarin was plausible and that
there is evidence that both the incidence and the severity of stroke may vary
according to the treatment received. The Committee also noted the ERG's views
about disutility of dabigatran and the inclusion of dyspepsia management costs
throughout treatment (see sections 3.30 and 3.31). The Committee agreed that
including all of these assumptions would be a more conservative approach.
4.14 Third, the Committee noted the ERG's view that the cost of INR monitoring had
been overestimated in the manufacturer's model. The Committee heard from the
clinical specialists that the introduction of dabigatran would not result in
complete closure of anticoagulation services with release of all the funding, and
the manufacturer's estimate (£414.90) was likely to be too high. It also heard that
INR monitoring costs varied in different settings and could not be quantified
precisely. The Committee agreed that exploring the effect of assuming the
alternative INR monitoring costs put forward by the ERG (£115.14, £241.54,
£279.36), in addition to the cost assumed in the manufacturer's submission,
would enable it to make a more accurate judgement about the cost effectiveness
of dabigatran.
4.15 Finally, the Committee noted the ERG's comments that the cost effectiveness of
dabigatran compared with warfarin varied substantially according to level of INR
control in those already being treated with warfarin. In the appraisal consultation
document, the manufacturer of dabigatran was therefore asked to provide further
analyses addressing the uncertainties outlined in sections 4.11 to 4.15.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
4.16 The Committee discussed the manufacturer's revised analyses and the critique
and the exploratory analyses performed by the ERG. The Committee noted that
the manufacturer's revised analysis included the relative risks from the whole RE-
LY trial population rather than from the post hoc subgroup analysis and had
explored the effect of varying the cost of INR monitoring as requested. It also
noted that the manufacturer's revised analysis incorporated an INR monitoring
cost of £241.54 in its base case as opposed to £414.90 in the original submission.
The Committee was aware that comments received during the consultation
largely agreed that INR monitoring costs are likely to be higher than the ERG's
lower estimate of £115.14 and possibly higher than £414.90 in some cases. The
Committee accepted the manufacturer's approach, acknowledging that although
INR costs may vary widely, this assumption was reasonable.
4.17 The Committee discussed the manufacturer's approach to including the ERG's
other preferred assumptions in the revised analysis (see section 3.33). The
Committee noted that the Gallagher et al. (2008) data on atrial fibrillation had not
been incorporated. However, the Committee accepted the manufacturer's
rationale and the supporting views of the ERG for using General Practice
Research Database data instead (see section 3.39). The Committee noted that, in
its revised analyses, the manufacturer had incorporated the ERG's preferred
assumptions about dyspepsia management costs throughout treatment, disability
and mortality risks being treatment independent, and disutility associated with
dabigatran. It further noted that combining all of these assumptions together with
an INR monitoring cost of £241.54 resulted in an ICER for dabigatran of £17,700
per QALY gained for the full sequential regimen in people starting treatment when
younger than 80 years and £18,400 per QALY gained in people starting treatment
at 80 years and older, compared with warfarin. Finally, the Committee noted that
the ERG's analysis, which included all of the requested assumptions, an INR
monitoring cost of £241.54, and the corrected values for ischaemic stroke and
disability rates (see section 3.39) resulted in an ICER of £18,900 per QALY gained
for the sequential regimen in people starting treatment younger than 80 years,
compared with warfarin. The Committee concluded that this was broadly in line
with the manufacturer's estimate and that the ICERs presented by the
manufacturer were robust to the changes requested. The Committee therefore
accepted the manufacturer's approach and concluded that the most plausible
ICERs for the whole population eligible for dabigatran were within the range
normally considered a cost-effective use of NHS resources, being less than

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
£20,000 per QALY gained.
4.18 The Committee discussed comments from consultees that suggested it may be
appropriate to recommend dabigatran for use only in people with atrial fibrillation
whose INR is not well controlled on warfarin. The Committee was satisfied that
the technology was a cost-effective treatment for the whole patient group. It
noted that robust evidence of differential clinical effectiveness and cost
effectiveness, with clear justification of the threshold level chosen, would be
needed to select out a subgroup, based on INR control, for whom dabigatran
would not be recommended.
4.19 The Committee was aware of the need for guidance to apply equally to those
already on warfarin and to those newly diagnosed with atrial fibrillation. The
Committee noted that, for people newly diagnosed but not already taking an
anticoagulant, any stratification of the population according to INR control would
mean that all patients would have to try warfarin for at least a few months to
assess whether the INR was well controlled and to estimate the time in
therapeutic range. The Committee heard from clinical specialists that many of the
significant complications of warfarin therapy are experienced in the first months
of treatment before the dose is established and stabilised. The Committee
accepted therefore that a large number of people having a trial of warfarin at
initial diagnosis could be expected to switch to dabigatran. It also accepted that
it was not reasonable to expect all patients to try warfarin first, with the
associated risks, for the purpose of selecting out a subgroup for whom
dabigatran was less cost effective.
4.20 The Committee was also aware of the estimates of the time that the INR in
people already taking warfarin would need to be in the target range for the ICERs
for dabigatran compared with warfarin to be above £30,000 per QALY gained.
Assuming an INR monitoring cost of £241.54 per annum, the manufacturer and
ERG estimated an average of 83% to 85% and 75% to 76% of the time
respectively. The Committee noted that this would apply to only a proportion of
the whole population. The Committee was aware that the average time spent in
therapeutic range for the UK centres in the RE-LY trial was 72%, and in the UK-
based study by Jones et al. (2005) there was an average time in therapeutic
range of 67.9%. It noted the ERG's analysis that explored the effects of time in
therapeutic range on the cost effectiveness of dabigatran compared with

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
warfarin. This calculated the ICER for the people with the best-controlled INR
(that is, within range 83.7% of the time) at £47,000 per QALY gained. However,
this figure incorporated INR monitoring costs of £241.54 (per annum) and the
ICER reduced considerably if higher INR monitoring costs of £414.90 per annum
were used. The Committee concluded that evidence for stratifying by INR control
was insufficient to exclude the minority of people with very good control from the
recommendation of dabigatran as a potential treatment option, and that the ICER
for the whole population should be the basis of the recommendation.
4.21 The Committee was mindful of the higher gastrointestinal bleeding rates
associated with dabigatran and of the relatively short-term safety data compared
with the established standard of care, warfarin. It was also mindful that for those
with very well-controlled INR on warfarin, the clinical benefits are likely to be less
than for those with poorly controlled INR. The Committee therefore concluded
that the decision about whether to start treatment with dabigatran in people with
atrial fibrillation should be made after an informed discussion between the
responsible clinician and the person about the safety risks and benefits of
dabigatran compared with warfarin. It also concluded that, for people currently
receiving warfarin, the potential risks and benefits of switching to dabigatran
should be considered in light of their level of INR control.
4.22 The Committee considered whether there were any equalities considerations
affecting population groups protected by equality legislation and concluded that
there were no equality issues relating to this appraisal that needed addressing in
the guidance.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning groups, NHS England and, with
respect to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this appraisal within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final appraisal document.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has atrial fibrillation and the healthcare professional responsible for their
care thinks that dabigatran etexilate is the right treatment, it should be available
for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
6 Appraisal Committee members and
NICE project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. Members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. There are 4 Appraisal Committees, each with
a chair and vice chair. Each Appraisal Committee meets once a month, except in
December when there are no meetings. Each Committee considers its own list of
technologies, and ongoing topics are not moved between Committees.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Dr Jane Adam (Chair)
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, St George's Hospital
Professor Iain Squire (Vice-Chair)
Consultant Physician, University Hospitals of Leicester
Professor A E Ades
Professor of Public Health Science, Department of Community Based Medicine, University
of Bristol
Dr Jeremy Braybrooke
Consultant Medical Oncologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Fiona Duncan
Clinical Nurse Specialist, Anaesthetic Department, Blackpool Victoria Hospital, Blackpool

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
Mr Christopher Earl
Surgical Care Practitioner, Renal Transplant Unit, Manchester Royal Infirmary
Mrs Eleanor Grey
Lay member
Professor Jonathan Grigg
Professor of Paediatric Respiratory and Environmental Medicine, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University London
Dr Peter Heywood
Consultant Neurologist, Frenchay Hospital
Dr Sharon Saint Lamont
Head of Quality and Innovation, North East Strategic Health Authority
Dr Ian Lewin
Consultant Endocrinologist, North Devon District Hospital
Dr Anne McCune
Consultant Hepatologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Alec Miners
Lecturer in Health Economics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Dr David Newsham
Lecturer (Orthoptics), University of Liverpool
Ms Pamela Rees
Lay member
Dr Ann Richardson
Lay member
Dr Paul Robinson
Medical Director, Merck Sharp & Dohme
Mr Stephen Sharp

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
Senior Statistician, MRC Epidemiology Unit
Mr Mike Spencer
Assistant Director Patient Experience, Cardiff and Vale University Health Board
Mr David Thomson
Lay member
Mr William Turner
Consultant Urologist, Addenbrooke's Hospital
Dr John Watkins
Clinical Senior Lecturer and Consultant in Public Health Medicine, Cardiff University and
National Public Health Service Wales
Dr Anthony S Wierzbicki
Consultant in Metabolic Medicine and Chemical Pathology, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospitals
NHS Trust
Dr Olivia Wu
Reader in Health Economics, University of Glasgow
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
Christian Griffiths
Technical Lead
Zoe Charles
Technical Adviser
Bijal Joshi
Project Manager

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
7 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The Evidence Review Group (ERG) report for this appraisal was prepared by the Centre for
Reviews and Dissemination (CRD), Centre for Health Economics (CHE), University of York:
• Spackman E, Burch J, Faria R, et al. Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke
and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation: Evidence Review Group Report (February
2011)
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal as
consultees and commentators. They were invited to comment on the draft scope, the ERG
report and the appraisal consultation document (ACD). Manufacturers or sponsors were
also invited to make written submissions. Professional or specialist, patient or carer
groups, and other consultees, had the opportunity to give their expert views.
Manufacturers or sponsors, professional or specialist, patient or carer groups, and other
consultees, also have the opportunity to appeal against the final appraisal determination.
Manufacturers or sponsors:
• Boehringer Ingelheim
Professional or specialist, and patient or carer groups:
• AntiCoagulation Europe (ACE)
• Anticoagulation Specialist Association (ASA)
• Arrhythmia Alliance (Atrial Fibrillation Association affiliated)
• British Association of Stroke Physicians
• British Cardiovascular Intervention Society (BCIS)
• British Heart Foundation
• British Society for Haematology
• Clinical Leaders of Thrombosis (CLOT)

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
• Heart Rhythm UK
• Royal College of Nursing
• Royal College of Pathologists
• Royal College of Physicians
• South Asian Health Foundation
• Stroke Association
Other consultees:
• Department of Health
• NHS Salford
• Welsh Government
Commentator organisations (did not provide written evidence and without the right of
appeal):
• Bayer
• Bristol–Myers Squibb
• Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (CRD), Centre for Health Economics (CHE),
University of York
• Commissioning Support Appraisals Service
• Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety for Northern Ireland
• Health Care Improvement Scotland
• National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment Programme
• Sanofi Aventis
The following individuals were selected from clinical specialist and patient expert
nominations from the non-manufacturer or sponsor consultees and commentators. They
gave their expert personal view on dabigatran by attending the initial Committee
discussion and providing written evidence to the Committee. They were also invited to

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
comment on the ACD.
• Professor Michael Laffan, Professor of Haemostasis and Thrombosis, nominated by
the Royal College of Pathologists and British Society for Haematology − clinical
specialist
• Professor Gregory Lip, Clinical Cardiologist, nominated by the British Cardiovascular
Society − clinical specialist
• Dr Caroline Lovelock, Senior Clinical Lecturer, nominated by the Royal College of
Physicians − clinical specialist
• Diane Eaton, nominated by AntiCoagulation Europe (ACE) – patient expert
• Joanne Jerrome, Assistant Director nominated by the Atrial Fibrillation Association –
patient expert
The following individuals were nominated as NHS Commissioning experts by the selected
PCT allocated to this appraisal. They gave their NHS commissioning personal view on
dabigatran by attending the initial Committee discussion and providing written evidence to
the Committee. They were also invited to comment on the ACD.
• Dr Andy Sutton, selected by NHS Salford – NHS commissioning expert
Representatives from the following manufacturer or sponsor attended Committee
meetings. They contributed only when asked by the Committee chair to clarify specific
issues and comment on factual accuracy.
• Boehringer Ingelheim

Dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation
(TA249)
Update information
July 2021: Recommendation 1.2 was updated to include the other anticoagulants approved
by NICE.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-4188-9
