=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "drugeluting-stents-for-the-treatment-of-coronary-artery-disease-pdf-82598311384261.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:21.464648",
  "file_size_bytes": 224068,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/drugeluting-stents-for-the-treatment-of-coronary-artery-disease-pdf-82598311384261.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Drug-eluting stents for the
treatment of coronary
artery disease
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 23 July 2008
Last updated: 18 November 2020
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta152

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
This guidance partially replaces TA71.
This guidance is partially replaced by NG185.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Drug-eluting stents are recommended for use in percutaneous coronary
intervention for treating stable angina, within their instructions for use, only if:
• the target artery to be treated has less than a 3-mm calibre or the lesion is
longer than 15 mm, and
• the price difference between drug-eluting stents and bare-metal stents is no
more than £300. [2020]
For recommendations on drug-eluting stents for people with unstable angina,
non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) or ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), see recommendation 1.1.18 and
recommendation 1.2.18 in NICE's guideline on acute coronary syndromes.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
2 Clinical need and practice
2.1 Coronary artery disease is also known as coronary heart disease (CHD) and
ischaemic heart disease. It is narrowing (stenosis) of the coronary arteries as a
result of deposition of atherosclerotic plaque, which results in an insufficient
supply of oxygen to the heart muscle. CHD may affect one or more arteries,
which may be of different diameters (calibres). The stenosis of arteries may be
partial or total. Coronary artery stenosis may be asymptomatic or may lead to
angina – chest pain that may be severe enough to restrict or prevent exertion. A
critical reduction of the blood supply to the heart may result in myocardial
infarction (MI) or death.
2.2 Mortality rates from CHD are decreasing but CHD remains the most common
cause of mortality in the UK. It accounted for nearly 117,500 deaths in the UK in
2002 (about 103,000 deaths in England and Wales). CHD is also the cause of
considerable morbidity and loss of ability to lead a normal life. In the UK, annually,
approximately 259,500 people experience an acute MI and approximately
341,500 new cases of angina (the most common form of CHD morbidity) are
reported. In Europe, CHD has been estimated to account for 9.7% of total
disability-adjusted life years lost.
2.3 Mortality and morbidity rates associated with CHD vary by socioeconomic group
(rates are higher in lower socioeconomic groups), by geographical area (rates are
highest in Wales, North West England, and the Northern England and Yorkshire
regions, and lowest in South East England) and by ethnic group (for example,
CHD rates are highest among people from the Indian subcontinent living in the
UK). The prevalence of CHD also increases with age and is higher in men than
women. The disease is more common in people with high serum cholesterol and/
or high blood pressure, in people who have type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus, in
people who smoke, and in people who are physically inactive and/or obese.
2.4 The symptoms and health risks associated with a stenosed artery may be treated
medically, by modifying risk factors (for example, smoking, hyperlipidaemia,
obesity and hyperglycaemia) and/or by drug treatment (for example, beta-
adrenergic blockers, nitrates, calcium-channel blockers, antiplatelet agents and/
or statins).

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
2.5 If these medical treatments fail or are inappropriate, two invasive therapies are
available. The first, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), involves major
cardiac surgery. The second, balloon angioplasty (or percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty) involves a widening from within the artery using a balloon
catheter, which is inserted through a femoral artery. When inflated, the balloon
increases the calibre of the artery. Most percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty procedures involve the use of stents. A stent is a thin wire-mesh tube
loaded over an angioplasty balloon. When the balloon inflates, the stent expands
like a scaffold to hold the vessel open, and is left behind after the balloon is
deflated and withdrawn. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is a generic
term that encompasses percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty with or
without stenting. The comparison of CABG with PCI including coronary artery
stents (bare-metal and drug-eluting) was covered by NICE's technology appraisal
on the use of coronary artery stents and is not dealt with in this appraisal.
2.6 One of the criteria for comparing the clinical effectiveness of PCI with stents with
standard PCI (without stents) is the incidence of subsequent attacks of angina
and major adverse coronary events (MACEs), which include death, MI and the
need for further revascularisation procedures (CABG or repeat PCI).
2.7 A number of problems with PCI may occur. Recoil of the artery which happens
when the balloon is deflated, usually occurs immediately or within 24 hours of
completing the procedure, and may be associated with acute occlusive
dissection of the vessel and require emergency CABG. In the medium term
restenosis of the artery after the procedure may occur and has two main causes:
contraction of the outer layer of the artery secondary to an injury reaction (3 to
6 months after the procedure) and proliferation of smooth muscle cells within the
arterial wall (4 to 6 months after the procedure), leading to intimal hyperplasia. As
a consequence of restenosis, a repeat procedure may be required and the rate of
reintervention is greater in patients who have arteries of small calibre ('small
vessels' – less than 3 mm in calibre), saphenous vein grafts and long lesions
(longer than 15 mm) or total occlusions. People with diabetes, who commonly
have arteries affected by atherosclerosis, also have a higher rate of restenosis.
2.8 Stent technology (type and platform, including the design, alloy used and strut
thickness) has developed rapidly, and recent advances aim to reduce the
likelihood of restenosis. Because restenosis is correlated with the degree of

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
inflammation present at the time of angioplasty, drug-eluting stents (DESs) were
developed. These are bare-metal stents (BMSs) coated with a drug, usually an
immune suppressant, to reduce inflammation or an antimitotic agent to reduce
cell proliferation. The drug reaches therapeutic concentrations in local tissues
only and may not be detectable systemically, thus avoiding systemic adverse
effects. A subsequent development was the use of a drug–polymer mix where the
drug is held temporarily in place within a polymer 'painted' onto the metallic stent,
allowing the drug to elute slowly into surrounding tissues. However, not all stents
are polymer based.
2.9 According to British Cardiovascular Intervention Society (BCIS) data,
approximately 70,000 PCI procedures were undertaken in the UK in 2005,
equating to 1165 per million of the population. In England, the number of
procedures per million of the population was 1169, and in Wales, 873.
2.10 The National Service Framework for CHD set a target in March 2000 for
revascularisations (PCIs and CABGs), of at least 1500 per million of the population
(750 for each type of intervention).
2.11 According to BCIS data, in the UK, the proportion of PCI procedures using stents
rose steeply between 1993 and 1999, from below 10% to nearly 80%. It continued
to increase, although more slowly, to about 94% in 2005. Data for DES use were
not available before 2002. In 2003 it was reported that 17% of all stents used in
the UK were DESs. In 2005 this had risen to around 62% in the UK, 60% in
England and 77% in Wales. Given the increases in numbers of PCI procedures, it
may be that utilisation rates are now much higher than this.
2.12 There is a risk of stent thrombosis associated with the use of both types of stent
(DESs and BMSs). To prevent thrombosis occurring, patients are required to use
an antiplatelet drug, such as clopidogrel, in addition to aspirin during and after
the implantation of a stent. Following data published in 2006, the US Food and
Drugs Administration (FDA)'s Circulatory Devices Systems Advisory Panel
recommended that the duration of clopidogrel use should be extended in patients
receiving a DES. The American College of Cardiologists/American Heart
Association PCI guidelines (also endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography Interventions) and the BCIS have recommended that for patients
receiving DESs the duration of clopidogrel use should be increased to at least

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
12 months, after which time continuation of clopidogrel should be reviewed
taking into account the risk for further events on an individual patient basis.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
3 The technologies
3.1 This technology appraisal focuses on DESs only. The preceding appraisal of DESs
(NICE's technology appraisal on the use of coronary artery stents) considered
only three devices (Taxus, Cypher and Dexamet) because at the time of
publication, these were the only DESs that had been granted Conformité
Européene (CE) marking for use within EU countries. Eight additional DESs have
been included in this appraisal.
3.2 Each DES has an instruction for use (IFU) document that includes the indications
for which the specific device can be used. The indications for use for each DES
vary, although the majority specify the sizes of vessels (diameter and length) to
be treated and are in accordance with their CE marking. Also included in the IFU
documents are details of side effects and specific contraindications for DESs.
3.3 Different drugs elute from the stents that are included in this appraisal: paclitaxel
is a broad-spectrum antimitotic agent that inhibits cell division; sirolimus
(previously known as rapamycin) is an immunosuppressive agent that reduces
inflammation; ABT-578 is a synthetic analogue of sirolimus; everolimus is an
immunosuppressive agent that is closely related to sirolimus; tacrolimus is an
immunosuppressive agent; and dexamethasone is a synthetic adrenocortical
steroid that reduces inflammation. These drugs may elute at different rates,
depending on the presence or absence of additional polymer coatings on the
stent.
3.4 The following list prices for DESs exclude VAT.
• The DES Axxion (Biosensors Limited) is a non-polymeric paclitaxel-eluting
stent (PES) with a list price of £995 (BMS equivalent: Nexus).
• The DES CoStar (Biotronik Limited) is a non-polymeric PES (BMS equivalent:
DepoStent). CoStar was originally included in this appraisal but is no longer
available.
• The DES Taxus (Boston Scientific) is a polymeric PES with a list price of
£1,300 (BMS equivalent: Express).

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
• The second-generation DES Taxus Liberté (Boston Scientific) is a polymeric
PES with a list price of £1,300 (BMS equivalent: Liberté).
• The DES Cypher (Cordis Corporation) is a polymeric sirolimus-eluting stent
(SES) with a list price of £1,340 (BMS equivalent: Bx Velocity).
• The second-generation DES Cypher Select (Cordis Corporation) is a
polymeric SES with a list price of £1,340 (BMS equivalent: Sonic).
• The DES Endeavor (Medtronic AVE) is a polymeric sirolimus analogue
ABT-578 (zotarolimus)-eluting stent (ZES) with a list price of £1,450 (BMS
equivalent: Driver).
• The DES Janus (Sorin) is a polymeric tacrolimus-eluting stent (TES) with a list
price of £1,500 (BMS equivalent: Janis).
• The DES Xience V (Guidant Ltd) is a polymeric everolimus-eluting stent (EES)
with a list price of £1,500 (BMS equivalent: Multi-Link Vision).
• The DES Dexamet (Abbott Vascular Devices Ltd) is a polymeric
dexamethasone-eluting stent (BMS equivalent: BiodivYsio). Dexamet was
originally included in this appraisal but is no longer available in the EU.
• The DES Yukon (Kiwimed Ltd) is a non-polymeric stent that can be coated
with any drug to be eluted and has a list price of £650.
3.5 As list prices are not commonly used for procuring devices in the NHS, updated
prices of DESs and BMSs were sought from the NHS Purchasing and Supply
Agency. Procurement of devices is complex and it should be noted that the
prices for DES and BMS are driven by a number of factors including the: market
conditions at the time of contracting; contract period; renewal date for the
procurement arrangements (contracts are usually updated annually and the most
recent contracts show significant decreases in the prices of DESs); volume
commitment; period commitment; combination of period and volume
commitment; product rationalisation or standardisation; retrospective threshold
discounts (for example, free set quantities of stents when agreed volumes have
been exceeded); consignment stock (for instance, when a supplier provides an
inventory to trust); and other added value inclusive arrangements (for example,
the provision of additional training and related equipment).

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
3.6 From the sample 2007/08 data received from the NHS Purchasing and Supply
Agency for NHS organisations in England for the stents included in this appraisal,
the mean price of DES was £529 and the mean price of BMS was £131. The price
difference between DESs compared with BMSs ranged from £203 to £615 across
a number of Health Authorities in England, although it should be noted that the
higher price differences tended to be seen in the older contracts which will be re-
tendered in due course, in accordance with relevant contract renewal schedules.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4 Evidence and interpretation
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence from a number of sources.
4.1 Clinical effectiveness
DESs versus BMSs – evidence from randomised controlled trials
4.1.1 A total of 17 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were identified that compared
DESs with BMSs, and data from all 17 were included for at least one outcome in
the meta-analysis.
• 10 studies compared an SES (Cypher) with the equivalent BMS.
• Four studies compared a PES (Taxus) with the equivalent BMS.
• One study compared both an SES (Cypher) and a PES (Taxus) with a newer
BMS.
• One study compared the ZES (Endeavor) with the equivalent BMS.
• One study compared the EES (Xience V) with the equivalent BMS.
No RCT evidence has yet been reported for the Axxion, CoStar, Dexamet or
Janus stents. Limited RCT data were available for the Yukon stent.
4.1.2 Study outcomes used in the RCTs included rates of mortality, acute MI, target
lesion revascularisation (TLR), target vessel revascularisation (TVR), composite
events (major adverse coronary event [MACE] and/or target vessel failure [TVF]),
angiographic binary restenosis and late luminal loss. Revascularisation was
usually prompted by protocol-driven angiographic evidence of restenosis either
for all participants or for a selected subgroup of participants. Only one trial
(BASKET) explicitly reported that no protocol-driven angiographic follow-up was
included. This trial compared both SES (Cypher) and PES (Taxus) DESs with a
newer BMS in a three-arm study.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4.1.3 All but three of the 17 RCTs were multicentre trials. Study size ranged from 60 to
over 1300 patients. Of the 17 trials, 11 included patients with single lesions. The
studies covered a range of vessel diameters from 2.25 mm to 4.00 mm, although
the lower range was not reported in some studies. Lesion length also varied,
ranging from 10 mm to 33 mm, although again the data were not always reported.
All studies permitted the inclusion of people with diabetes, and all but three
studies excluded acute or evolving MI. The presence of unprotected left main
coronary artery excluded patients from many trials, as did severe calcification or
tortuosity, total occlusion, bifurcation, the presence of thrombus in the target
vessel, previous PCI within 30 days or PCI other than balloon required as part of
the study intervention.
4.1.4 A total of 12 trials described the co-therapies used. Aspirin was prescribed
before intervention in 11 of these studies and used after the procedure in all 12.
Clopidogrel was used as an antiplatelet therapy in all of the 12 studies; ticlopidine
was available for use as an alternative to clopidogrel in five studies. In one trial,
tirofiban, used in combination with a DES, was compared with abciximab used
with a BMS. The duration of antiplatelet therapy after intervention ranged from
2 months in three trials to 1 year in one study.
4.1.5 Meta-analysis was carried out by the Assessment Group for rates of mortality,
acute MI, TLR, TVR, composite event (MACE and/or TVF), angiographic binary
restenosis and late luminal loss. Analysis of mortality, acute MI and event rates
used pooled results from over 7000 participants. Data in the form of an odds ratio
(OR) and 95% confidence interval (95% CI) were analysed using the
Mantel–Haenszel method fixed-effect model. For continuous outcomes, weighted
mean differences (WMDs) were analysed. Where there was significant
heterogeneity, analysis using a random-effects model was also undertaken.
4.1.6 In addition to analyses of the individual studies, pooled estimates (giving the OR
and 95% CI) were provided for each 'eluted drug' group (for example, comparing
a PES [Taxus] and all BMSs in the paclitaxel studies). Data related to the SES
(Cypher) and the sirolimus-analogue stent, ZES (Endeavor) in some instances
were pooled and presented as pooled SES results. All eluted drug group results
were also pooled to obtain estimates for a meta-analysis of any-type DESs
compared with any-type BMSs. The meta-analysis was performed for available
data at follow-ups of up to 1 month, 6 to 9 months, 1 year, 2 years and 3 years.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
The Assessment Group assumed, when making decisions about the
appropriateness of combining data, that all BMSs are similar and, likewise, all
DESs are similar except in the drug delivered; and that the stent design and the
insertion system do not have an impact on clinical outcomes.
4.1.7 For rates of mortality and rates of acute MI, one study found a statistically
significant difference in favour of the SES (Cypher) compared with the BMS for MI
at 6 to 9 months (OR 0.19, 95% CI 0.04, 0.87). There were no statistically
significant differences between the DES and the BMS in the individual studies for
all other follow-up periods analysed to 3 years. There were no statistically
significant differences between the DES and the BMS for the pooled eluted drug
groups (PES [Taxus] and pooled SESs) and for the pooled analyses of any-type
DES compared with any-type BMS for any of the follow-up periods.
4.1.8 For event rate (MACE and TVF), the individual studies of PES (Taxus), SES
(Cypher) and ZES (Endeavor), and the pooled eluted drug groups analysis
showed statistically significant differences in favour of DESs over BMSs. This was
also the case for the overall meta-analysis, which favoured any-type DESs over
any-type BMSs at all follow-up time points: 6 to 9 months (OR 0.46, 95% CI 0.40
to 0.53), 1 year (OR 0.39, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.47), 2 years (OR 0.43, 95% CI 0.34 to
0.54) and 3 years (OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.32 to 0.55). Statistical heterogeneity was
indicated at the 6 to 9 months follow-up; a random-effect analysis for this time
point showed only a small effect on the OR (OR 0.44, 95% CI 0.36 to 0.54). The
difference between the EES (Xience V) and the BMS was not statistically
significant at the only follow-up period (6 to 9 months).
4.1.9 For TVR, not all individual studies of PES (Taxus) showed statistical significance
compared with BMSs for all time periods up to 3 years. The individual studies for
SESs (Cypher) and ZESs (Endeavor) all showed statistical significance over BMSs
up to 3 years. The pooled eluted drug groups analysis showed statistically
significant differences in favour of a PES (Taxus) over BMSs at follow-up time
points up to 2 years: 6 to 9 months (OR 0.54, 95% CI 0.43 to 0.68), 1 year
(OR 0.40, 95% CI 0.29 to 0.55) and 2 years (OR 0.45, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.59). At
3 years, the difference was no longer statistically significant, but the data at this
time point were derived from a single, relatively small study that may have been
underpowered. TVR data for a SES (Cypher) versus a BMS were available for two
trials at 6 to 9 months and for single trials at 1 and 3 years. These showed

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
statistically significantly differences in favour of the SES (Cypher) compared with
the BMS at: 6 to 9 months (OR 0.33, 95% CI 0.18, 0.62), 1 year (OR 0.34, 95% CI
0.19 to 0.60) and 3 years (OR 0.35, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.49). TVR data for the ZES
(Endeavor) at 6 to 9 months, the only time period available, was statistically
significant in favour of the ZES over the BMS (OR 0.41, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.63).
There were no data for EES (Xience V) for this outcome measure.
4.1.10 Rates of revascularisation (TLR) at 1 year for procedures carried out with a DES
within individual trials were less than 5%, and typically in the 10% to 25% range
for procedures that used a BMS. For example, in three trials of PES (Taxus), the
rates were 0%, 4.7% and 4.2% for the DES compared with 10.0%, 12.9% and 14.7%
for the BMS, respectively. Rates at 1 year in three trials of a SES (Cypher) were
4.6%, 0% and 4.9% for the DES compared with 24.9%, 13.6% and 20.0% for the
BMS, respectively. For TLR, the pooled eluted drug groups analysis showed
statistically significant differences in favour of a PES (Taxus) over BMSs at follow-
up periods of up to 2 years: 6 to 9 months (OR 0.37, 95% CI 0.28 to 0.49), 1 year
(OR 0.26, 95% CI 0.18 to 0.39) and 2 years (OR 0.28, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.40). At
3 years, the difference was no longer statistically significant, but the data at this
time point were derived from a single, relatively small study that may have been
underpowered. TLR data for a SES (Cypher) showed it to be statistically
significantly more effective than a BMS at all time points up to 3 years: 6 to
9 months (OR 0.21, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.30), 1 year (OR 0.17, 95% CI 0.12 to 0.25),
2 years (OR 0.22, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.30) and 3 years (OR 0.25, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.36).
The data for the ZES (Endeavor) at the follow-up period of 6-9 months showed it
to be statistically significantly more effective than the BMS (OR 0.35, 95% CI
0.22, 0.56). Lower rates of TLR (3.8% versus 21.4%) were apparent for the EES
(Xience V) group at 6 months (the only follow-up period) but the difference was
not statistically significant. For TLR, the meta-analyses showed statistically
significant differences in favour of any-type DES over any-type BMS, with
improved rates of lesion revascularisation at all follow-up time points up to
3 years: 6 to 9 months (OR 0.30, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.37), 1 year (OR 0.21, 95% CI
0.16 to 0.27), 2 years (OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.31) and 3 years (OR 0.25, 95% CI
0.17 to 0.35).

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
DES versus BMS – DESs with non-RCT data
4.1.11 The TES (Janus) was examined in a non-controlled study as was the PES (Taxus
Liberté). A range of formulations of the PES (CoStar) was evaluated in two non-
randomised controlled studies, and the Yukon DES was evaluated in a dose-
ranging non-randomised controlled study comparing Yukon coated with sirolimus
with the same stent carrying no drug. The Dexamet DES was studied in one non-
randomised study of Dexamet compared with a BMS and four non-controlled
studies (including two registries).
4.1.12 Outcome data were limited due to the short follow-up periods: 30 days for the
PES (Taxus Liberté) study; 4 months for one PES (CoStar) study and 1 year for
the other PES (CoStar) study; 6 months for the Dexamet studies and for the TES
stent; and up to 1 year for the SES (Yukon) study. Angiographic outcomes, binary
restenosis and/or late loss were reported for the PES (CoStar), Dexamet and the
SES (Yukon). Because of the variety of DESs considered in these studies, the
methodological limits of the available studies, and the varied and limited follow-
up, the Assessment Group did not consider pooled analysis to be appropriate.
4.1.13 For the TES (Janus), limited data were reported; at 30 days no events (death, MI
or TLR) had occurred. For the PES (Taxus Liberté) the data available at 30 days
were marked as commercial in confidence. For the PES (CoStar), the only data
available were for one of the two arms at 1 year for one trial and interim data from
two of the four arms of the other ongoing study.
4.1.14 Data for the SES (Yukon) were reported at 1 month and 1 year. No deaths
occurred in the first month. Rates of acute MI up to 1 month were 1.8% in the SES
group and 1.3% in the BMS group. At 1 year, the composite of death or non-fatal
MI was 2.7% for the Yukon SES and 3.9% for the BMS. No statistically significant
differences were detected. At 1 year, TLR was reported in 12.6% of the SES group
and 21.5% of the BMS group, and the difference was statistically significant in
favour of the SES (OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.81).
4.1.15 The non-randomised trial that compared Dexamet (DES) with a BMS reported no
deaths among the 100 participants receiving either stent and only one incidence
of acute MI, which was in the BMS group, up to a mean of 8 months' follow-up.
Revascularisations for this time period were 2% TLR in the DES group and 10%

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
TLR (12% TVR) in the BMS group. Composite rates of MACEs, consisting entirely
of revascularisations, were 2% for the DES and 12% for the BMS. Neither of these
comparisons showed statistically significant differences.
DES versus DES
4.1.16 Eight RCTs comparing different DES types were identified by the Assessment
Group. Six RCTs compared a SES (Cypher) with a PES (Taxus; including one trial
that was also assessed in the DES versus BMS clinical section because it had a
BMS arm as well as two DES arms), one studied SES (Cypher) in comparison with
the newer SES (Cypher Select) and one compared the Yukon, as a SES, with a
PES (Taxus).
4.1.17 Six trials were conducted in only one or two centres in European countries, and
two were multicentre and multinational. Study sizes ranged from 200 to 1350
patients. Two trials were distinct in that they did not incorporate planned
angiographic assessment of trial participants. Only two trials presented
randomisation details and none of the studies presented adequate information on
whether the RCTs were conducted under 'blind' conditions. One study did not
present an intention-to-treat analysis, and for two studies it was unclear whether
events were reported according to the original randomised allocations.
4.1.18 A meta-analysis was conducted according to which pairing of DES types was
compared within trials (most commonly this was the SES [Cypher] versus the PES
[Taxus]). No total pooled effect estimate was calculated across multiple
groupings of DES versus DES trials.
4.1.19 There were no statistically significant differences in rates of mortality or acute MI
for any of the pairings of DES types.
4.1.20 For TLR, one individual study showed a statistically significantly better rate of
TLR, at 6 to 9 months, with the SES (Cypher) compared with the PES (Taxus; OR
0.56, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.93). Only one RCT had data available beyond 9 months; in
this study, rates of TLR at 1 year were 5.7% for the SES (Cypher) compared with
9.0% for the PES (Taxus); the difference was not statistically significant. The
Assessment Group's pooled analysis of TLR up to 9 months was statistically

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
significant in favour of the SES (Cypher) over the PES (Taxus; OR 0.70, 95% CI
0.51 to 0.97).
4.1.21 A statistically significant reduction in TVR with the SES (Cypher) compared with
the PES (Taxus) was determined from a meta-analysis of two trials at 6 to
9 months (OR 0.59, 95% CI 0.39 to 0.89). A reduction in the composite event rate
(MACE) at 6 to 9 months was also statistically significant with the SES (Cypher)
compared with the PES (Taxus; OR 0.75, 95% CI 0.59 to 0.96).
Effects of DESs on the risks of thrombosis, MI and mortality
4.1.22 In December 2006, following publication of data on longer-term risks associated
with DES (thrombosis, MI and mortality), the FDA convened a public meeting of
its Circulatory System Devices Advisory Panel to review and analyse the available
data and to provide recommendations for appropriate actions to address this
issue. In January 2007, the Circulatory System Devices Advisory Panel made
recommendations to the FDA. The Panel stated, 'When the DES, which are
indicated for use in the USA (SES [Cypher]) and (PES [Taxus]), are used in
accordance with their approved indications both are associated with a small
increase in stent thrombosis compared with BMS at 1 year after stent
implantation; the increased risk of stent thrombosis was not associated with an
increased risk of death or MI compared with BMS; and the concerns about
thrombosis do not outweigh the benefits of DES compared with BMS when DES
are implanted within the limits of their approved indications for use.' The FDA
stated that a longer duration of antiplatelet therapy may be beneficial, and this
has led to the recommendation in the PCI guideline of the American College of
Cardiologists/American Heart Association (endorsed by the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography Interventions) that in patients receiving DESs the
duration of clopidogrel use should be increased to 12 months. The BCIS has also
recommended 12 months' use of clopidogrel in patients receiving a DES.
4.1.23 The Circulatory System Devices Advisory Panel also considered use of DESs in
patients with more complex coronary lesions than those studied to support initial
marketing approval ('off-label' use). The Panel agreed that use of DESs 'off-label'
is associated with an increased risk of stent thrombosis, MI or death compared
with 'on-label' use, and until more data are available DES labels (IFUs) should

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
state that when DESs are used off-label, patient outcomes may not be the same
as the results observed in the clinical trials conducted to support marketing
approval. The FDA has since defined off-label use to mean the use of a medical
product for treatments other than those for which the product was initially
approved; or use not explicitly included in product labelling (intended use and
IFU). The UK Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
supports this definition of off-label use for the DESs that have been approved for
use in Europe.
4.1.24 Each DES included in this appraisal has an IFU document that lists the indications
for which it can be used. The sizes of vessels (diameter and length) to be treated
are stated in the majority of the IFUs, as are the specific contraindications. The
FDA considers that although patients with diabetes were included in the pivotal
trials, the number of patients was insufficient for either the SES (Cypher) or the
PES (Taxus) to earn a specific labelled indication for people with diabetes. The
UK MHRA supports the view of the FDA with regard to individuals with diabetes
and only one of the DESs, the PES (Taxus), included in this appraisal has recently
been specifically indicated for people with diabetes.
Summary
4.1.25 There were no statistically significant differences detected in death or MI
between the pooled subgroups and pooled any-type DES groups. The pooled
DES analysis indicated that revascularisation rates were reduced by
approximately three quarters compared with BMSs, consistent across most
studies of the PES (Taxus) and SESs (Cypher; Endeavor at 6 to 9 months). The
benefits of DESs over BMSs for TLR were seen at 1 year, and this significant
difference was maintained for up to 3 years. For the TVR outcome there were
statistically significant differences in favour of any-type DES over BMS for most
of the time points assessed.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4.2 Cost effectiveness
Published literature
4.2.1 A total of 10 full economic evaluations were included in the assessment report, all
of which compared an SES with a BMS, although four evaluations also included a
PES. One of the evaluations was conducted in the UK; the rest were conducted in
the USA, Canada or the rest of Europe. Seven evaluations used a 1-year time
horizon, one used 2 years, one used 6 months and one used a patient's lifetime.
Of the 10 evaluations, nine estimated that the cost of DESs incurred a price
premium/difference (the difference in cost between a given BMS and the drug-
eluting equivalent), which ranged from £233 to £1,225. Four of the evaluations
reported health outcomes in terms of quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). Three
evaluations provided incremental costs per QALY for a general population, and
these costs ranged from US$27,450 to Can$96,523 (approximately US$93,000).
The fourth evaluation did not include a general population because subgroups
were found to be too dissimilar for comparison. Two evaluations reported the
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) per repeat revascularisation avoided;
one estimated it to be US$1650 over 1 year and the other estimated it to be
approximately US$7000 over 2 years. The majority of evaluations concluded that
DESs are more cost effective than BMSs for patients with types of arteries that
have a higher risk of restenosis, although there was great disparity between
evaluations, with a variety of outcomes and a range of ICERs being reported.
4.2.2 Only one economic study, carried out alongside the BASKET RCT, reflected
clinical practice because no protocol-driven angiographic follow-up was included.
This study's results suggested that, at a threshold of €7800 per MACE avoided,
DESs could potentially be cost effective in the following subgroups of patients:
those older than 65 years; those with more than one segment treated; those with
triple-vessel disease; those with a stent length of more than 20 mm; and those
with small stent diameters.
Manufacturers' economic models
4.2.3 Three models were submitted by DES manufacturers.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4.2.4 The decision analytic model from Boston Scientific compared the PES (Taxus)
with the equivalent BMS, for a general population and for subgroups. The
incremental costs per QALY at 1 year were given as £29,587 for the overall
population and £1,020 for patients with diabetes. For patients with small vessels
and long lesions, the PES (Taxus) was dominant (both more effective and less
costly than the BMS). For the PES (Taxus) at 2 years, the incremental cost per
QALY for the overall population was given as £13,394, and it was dominant for
patients with small vessels and those with diabetes. The model was highly
sensitive to variations in the duration of clopidogrel therapy and the average
number of stents used. In the manufacturer's sensitivity analyses, when the
number of stents used per procedure was increased from 1.4 to 1.7, in line with
the Assessment Group's model, the estimated cost per QALY at 1 year for the
overall population increased to £56,731; however, the subgroup estimates were
only marginally increased. If the duration of clopidogrel therapy after DES
implantation was increased from 6 to 12 months, the cost per QALY at 12 months
increased to £71,634 for the total population and to over £30,000 for the
subgroup with diabetes.
4.2.5 The decision analytic model from Cordis compared the SES (Cypher) with the
equivalent BMS for a 'no-risk-factor' population and for subgroups. The model
was split into a two-way analysis of the BMS versus the SES (Cypher) and a
three-way analysis of the BMS versus the PES (Taxus) versus the SES (Cypher).
In extending the three-way analysis to 2 years, an indirect comparison was
undertaken that made an assumption that the BMSs in both trials (Boston
Scientific and Cordis BMS) are equivalent. The cost data for the technologies (the
BMS and Taxus) were considered by the Assessment Group to be overestimated
and when the Assessment Group re-ran the model increasing the SES (Cypher)
price premium over the equivalent BMS from £433 to £695, the incremental cost
per QALY increased from £29,259 to £69,613 for the 'no risk factor' subgroup;
from £10,178 to £39,508 for the small-vessels subgroup; from £16,460 to
£49,345 for the long-lesions subgroup; and from £9,702 to £38,446 for the group
with diabetes.
4.2.6 The Markov model presented by Medtronic compared the ZES (Endeavor
[sirolimus analogue ABT-578]) with Medtronic's comparable BMS, for a total
population. The submission measured costs and benefits at 5 years, extrapolating
the 9-month trial data. In one scenario, the two arms were assumed to be

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
equivalent in terms of risk of repeat revascularisations after 1 year. The
incremental cost per QALY was estimated at £11,220. No subgroup analyses were
undertaken. The Assessment Group found the model to be highly sensitive to
baseline TVR rates and the number of index stents used. If baseline TVR rates
were reduced below 12% (for both the BMS and the ZES), then the ICER
exceeded £30,000. If the average number of stents used for the index procedure
was increased to 1.4, the ICER increased to £39,174. The Assessment Group
noted that the two factors to which the model was sensitive were taken from a
single positive trial.
4.2.7 The submission from Kiwimed compared an SES (Yukon) with the Kiwimed BMS
for a total population. The effectiveness data were taken from the SES (Cypher)
trials, so an untested assumption was made that the SES (Yukon) has equivalent
effectiveness to the SES (Cypher). Extrapolation from 2 to 5 years was
undertaken using an assumption that patients remained in the same health state
that they were in at the end of 1 year. Kiwimed's submission stated that the
model results indicated that the SES (Yukon) was dominant compared with the
BMS in the total population. In a sensitivity analysis varying the cost of the stent
and the probability of restenosis, the ICERs for the SES (Yukon) were always
under £30,000 per QALY.
Assessment Group model: methods
4.2.8 The Assessment Group's model used the framework from the original appraisal
with some minor modifications as follows: the time horizon was restricted to
1 year, so no discounting was necessary; particular risk groups were examined; in
addition to the modelling of any-type DES compared with BMS, some head to
head comparisons were conducted (SES (Cypher) compared with the PES
(Taxus).
4.2.9 A difference between the effectiveness of DES and BMS was only seen with
regard to revascularisation (TLR and TVR) and event rate (MACE and TVF). For
these endpoints, the clinical trials show evidence of differences between DESs
and BMSs at 1 year. The clinical trials show evidence in favour of DESs over all
follow-up periods up to 3 years with a trend towards the greatest benefit
occurring within the first year.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4.2.10 In the Assessment Group's model the most important factors in determining the
incremental cost were the additional cost per DES implanted (price premium/
difference) and the number of stents implanted per patient. The most important
factors in determining benefit in the model were the absolute risk of
revascularisation for patients treated with a BMS and the risk reduction
attributable to the use of a DES.
4.2.11 The acquisition cost of a given stent may vary in different settings because of
negotiated procurement discounts. The Assessment Group in their economic
evaluation used the prices from a market survey of NHS purchasers. The survey
was conducted by the NHS Purchasing and Supply Agency in May/June 2005 to
identify the prices in contracts covering the period 2004/05 for both DESs and
BMSs. The combined data from 12 purchasing bodies covering 20 hospital trusts
provided consistent estimates of average unit prices and of the differences in
price between DESs and BMSs. Results were provided for the two main suppliers
of DESs: Boston Scientific (Taxus) and Cordis Corporation (Cypher). The effective
sale price per Taxus PES (excluding VAT) was £815. Because there was only one
recorded instance of a significant local volume discount agreement for Cypher in
the survey, the average sample price for the Cypher SES (excluding VAT) was
£937. The estimated average price for a BMS in the survey (excluding VAT) was
£278, so the price differences are £537 and £659 per DES for Taxus and Cypher,
respectively.
4.2.12 Information received during the consultation period for the appraisal consultation
document suggested that the prices for DESs had decreased since the 2005
survey. Therefore updated prices were sought from the NHS Purchasing and
Supply Agency. From the sample 2007/08 data received from the NHS
Purchasing and Supply Agency for NHS organisations in England for the stents
included in this appraisal, the mean price of DES was £529 and the mean price of
BMS was £131. The price difference between DESs compared with BMSs ranged
from £203 to £615 across a number of Health Authorities in England.
4.2.13 To calculate the PCI procedure costs it was necessary to subtract the included
costs of stents (DES and BMS) from the published PCI costs, and then to add
back the model estimates of the number of stents, the type of stent and the cost
per stent. In the final analyses, the Assessment Group assumed a wastage rate of
1%.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
4.2.14 The Assessment Group base-case analysis used results from two observational
studies of stented patients treated at the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre, to
convert the efficacy of any-type DES to effectiveness estimates for repeat
revascularisations and lesions treated in repeat revascularisations. The
Assessment Group found that 51% of patients who underwent a second PCI
required repeat treatment to previously treated lesions only. An additional 17% of
patients received repeat treatment to a target lesion at the same time as
treatment to a previously untreated lesion in the same vessel; these are the
patients in whom DESs can be expected to produce benefit. Applying these
proportions to the relative risk reduction from the trials of 74.6% (for TLR
obtained from the meta-analysis of any-type DES trials) yielded an expected risk
reduction in all revascularisations at 12 months of between 38% (95% CI 32 to
44%) and 50% (95% CI 44 to 57%). The Assessment Group also considered the
likely benefit that any-type DES may offer in reducing the number of lesions
treated in repeat revascularisations. When applied to the TLR relative risk
reductions from the meta-analysis, this suggested that the reduction in the
number of lesions treated in subsequent interventions was between 37% (95% CI
31 to 42%) and 53% (95% CI 47 to 59%) based on TLR (the Assessment Group
counted lesions treated but excluded cases undergoing CABG rather than PCI).
The Assessment Group noted that the BASKET trial, which did not include
protocol-driven angiography, reported a risk reduction for DESs of 41% at
6 months. The Assessment Group therefore used 41% for the risk reduction
associated with DESs in its base-case analyses.
4.2.15 The Assessment Group stated that the ICERs of any-type DESs compared with
any-type BMSs are very dependent on the estimates of relative risk reduction in
revascularisations and on the absolute rate of revascularisation in the types of
patients in whom they are used. The absolute rates of revascularisation were
derived from the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data, and the potential of
benefit was reassessed on the basis of the audit data concerning those patients
in whom the repeat procedure required treatment of new lesions. This resulted in
an absolute rate of revascularisation for all patients of 7.43%. The Assessment
Group also carried out sensitivity analyses, varying rates of revascularisation for
all patients up to 13%, based on trial data.
4.2.16 Using the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data, the Assessment Group
developed separate risk models for elective and non-elective patients using

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
patient and lesion characteristics known at the time of the index intervention.
Risk factors for the patients were identified in the assessment report as being
calcification, angulation greater than 45 degrees, restenotic lesion, triple-vessel
disease, vessel diameter of less than 2 mm and prior CABG. In the final analyses,
the absolute rates of repeat revascularisations for the conventional risk factors
(long lesions, small vessels, diabetes and all combinations of these) were
provided using the Liverpool audit data. The Assessment Group stated that,
because none of these three factors in the multivariate model achieved
conventional significance using the Liverpool audit data, the individual relative
risks have wide confidence intervals and should be considered only as illustrative.
The mean 12-month repeat revascularisation rate for all patients with small
vessels was 15.25% (95% CI 9.38% to 22.24%), with a rate difference p = 0.02; for
those with long lesions it was 10.23% (95% CI 8.10% to 12.57%), p = 0.09; and for
those with diabetes it was 10.61% (95% CI 7.52% to 14.14%), p = 0.14.
4.2.17 The Assessment Group used patient survey data from the Health Outcomes Data
Repository (HoDAR) database for its utility values. The difference in HoDAR
health-related quality of life scores between patients with severe angina and
those recovered from revascularisation (0.158) was similar to the ARTS trial result
(0.16), which was used in the previous appraisal. The assumptions made by the
Assessment Group in the final analyses for disutilities associated with CABG
versus PCI in the 6-week period following the procedure were that for a 2-week
post-operative period, patients undergoing CABG experience a very low quality
of life (0.0), and for the next 2 weeks the mean utility score recovers in a linear
fashion achieving full benefit (0.660) by 4 weeks after the operation. Patients
undergoing PCI were assumed to recover full benefit linearly over a 2-week
period following the procedure. The Assessment Group concluded additionally
that there was no evidence to suggest an effect on the rate of acute MI or
mortality with CABG compared with PCI plus stenting.
4.2.18 When BMSs and DESs were compared, the meta-analysis showed a trend
towards increased numbers of non-fatal acute MIs with BMSs. The Assessment
Group concluded in their analyses that based on the reviewed evidence, the
maximum likely effect of this is equivalent to, per patient, an overall cost saving of
about £13 and a utility gain of about 0.00055 when DESs are used.
4.2.19 The clinical evidence from the meta-analyses in the assessment report

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
suggested that the SES (Cypher) reduces repeat revascularisations compared
with the PES (Taxus). Because most of the clinical trials were limited to 6 to
9 months' duration, the Assessment Group carried out the economic evaluation
assuming clinical equivalence and distinguished between stents only on the basis
of price.
4.2.20 In the additional analyses requested by the Committee, the Assessment Group
undertook sensitivity analyses by varying a number of the parameters in the
original model. The results of the sensitivity analyses were presented as a
number of tables containing the ICERs for a range of price premiums, for a range
of absolute risks of revascularisation of BMSs, for the total population of stented
patients and the risk-factor groups (small vessel, long lesion, diabetes and all
combinations of these). Tables were presented for different numbers of stents
(mean number, 1, 2 or 3) per patient. The Assessment Group also undertook new
sensitivity analyses that took account of an additional 9 months' use of
clopidogrel in patients receiving DESs, in accordance with the recent BCIS
recommendations. These additional costs were applied only to 56% of the patient
population because it was suggested by Consultees that 44% of patients would
have acute coronary syndrome and therefore already be receiving 12 months'
treatment with clopidogrel in accordance with 'Clopidogrel in the treatment of
non-ST-segment-elevation acute coronary syndrome' (NICE technology appraisal
guidance on clopidogrel in the treatment of non-ST-segment-elevation acute
coronary syndrome).
4.2.21 The Assessment Group, at the request of the Committee, also provided estimates
based on the analyses using a relative risk reduction with DESs of 55% as the
base case and a sensitivity analysis of 65%. These relative risk reductions with
DESs were used for a rate of revascularisation, using BMSs, of 11%, which was
obtained from combining results for all patients (equivalent to 10% for elective
and 13% for non-elective patients). The corresponding risk of revascularisation
using BMSs for the risk groups and the mean number of stents were also
calculated from the combined datasets for the elective and non-elective patients.
4.2.22 Following consultation, the Assessment Group provided two additional analyses.
The first additional analysis updated the 2003/04 resource costs with reference
costs from 2005/06. The waiting times for PCI and CABG were updated from 20
to 20.5 weeks for PCI and from 13 to 20.9 weeks for CABG. The number of

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
patients with acute coronary syndrome was changed from 44% to 48.5%, and
consequently the number of patients receiving an extra 9 months' treatment with
clopidogrel was reduced from 56% to 51.5%.
4.2.23 In addition to the changes to resource costs, waiting times and number of
patients with acute coronary syndrome, the second additional analysis included
new parameters based on alternative suggestions from the BCIS. The
Assessment Group modified BCIS's suggestion regarding the presentational
case-mix. The following parameters were used in the model: the percentages of
elective and non-elective patients were changed from 68% to 57% for elective
patients and from 32% to 43% for non-elective patients; the absolute risk of
revascularisation of BMS for all patients was changed from 11% to 13% by
combining 11.5% of elective and 15% on non-elective patients from the Liverpool
Cardiothoracic Centre audit dataset; the relative risks for revascularisation in
high-risk groups were set to 1.75 for small vessels, 1.35 for long lesions and 1.52
for diabetes; and the relative risk reductions from using DES were set to 60% for
all patients; 69% for patients with small vessels; 70% for patients with long
lesions and 61% for patients with diabetes.
Assessment Group model: results
4.2.24 Based on the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data, the Assessment
Group's original base-case scenario as described in 4.2.20 assumes the overall
repeat revascularisation rate for the total population of stented patients in the UK
at 12 months after PCI with BMSs is 7.43%. Using 7.43% for all patients, the
absolute rates of repeat revascularisation for the risk factors become: 7.8% for
long lesions; 9.0% for diabetes; and 9.9% for small vessels. Using the overall
mean number of stents implanted per patient from the Liverpool Cardiothoracic
Centre audit data (1.615) and assuming a price difference of £600 (approximate
average of the price difference of the PES Taxus and the SES Cypher, from the
survey data) the resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of
elective patients are approximately: £407,000 for all patients; £380,000 for long
lesions; £340,000 for diabetes; and £306,000 for small vessels. Using the overall
mean number of stents implanted per patient for non-elective patients (1.467) the
resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups, at a price difference
of £600, are: £282,000 for all patients; £250,000 for long lesions; £353,000 for

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
diabetes; and £94,000 for small vessels.
4.2.25 Based on the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data, the Assessment
Group's re-analysis of the base-case scenario assumes an 11% overall
revascularisation rate for the total population of stented patients in the UK at
12 months after PCI with BMSs. Using 11% for all patients, the absolute rates of
repeat revascularisation for the risk factors become: 11.7% for long lesions; 11.6%
for diabetes; and 19% for small vessels. The relative risk reduction with DESs is
assumed to be 55%. Using the overall mean number of stents implanted per
patient from the Liverpool audit data, both elective and non-elective (1.571) and
assuming a price difference of £600 (approximate average of the price difference
of the PES [Taxus] and the SES [Cypher], from the survey data) the resulting
incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of patients are approximately:
£213,000 for all patients; £183,000 for long lesions; £180,000 for diabetes; and
£146,000 for small vessels. Assuming a price difference of £300 the resulting
incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of patients are approximately:
£101,000 for all patients; £85,000 for long lesions; £84,000 for diabetes; and
£59,000 for small vessels.
4.2.26 For the Assessment Group's sensitivity analysis for the combined elective and
non-elective data, using a relative risk reduction with DESs of 65% and a price
difference of £600, the resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the
groups of patients are approximately: £174,000 for all patients; £148,000 for long
lesions; £146,000 for diabetes; and £116,000 for small vessels. Assuming a price
difference of £300 the resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the
groups of patients are approximately: £78,000 for all patients; £65,000 for long
lesions; £64,000 for diabetes; and £41,000 for small vessels.
4.2.27 The Assessment Group's additional analysis as described in 4.2.22, assuming a
price difference of £600 for the base case (55% relative risk reduction of DES),
results in incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of patients of
approximately: £171,000 for all patients; £158,000 for long lesions; £156,000 for
diabetes; and £124,000 for small vessels. Assuming a price difference of £300
the resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of patients are
approximately: £74,000 for all patients; £66,000 for long lesions; £65,000 for
diabetes; and £41,000 for small vessels. For the updated Assessment Group's
sensitivity analysis (65% for the relative risk reduction of DES) the resulting

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
incremental costs per QALY, for a price difference of £600, for each of the groups
of patients are approximately: £137,000 for all patients; £126,000 for long lesions;
£124,000 for diabetes; and £95,000 for small vessels. Assuming a price
difference of £300 the resulting incremental costs per QALY for each of the
groups of patients are approximately: £54,000 for all patients; £47,000 for long
lesions; £46,000 for diabetes; and £25,000 for small vessels.
4.2.28 The Assessment Group's second additional analysis, as described in 4.2.23,
resulted in incremental costs per QALY for each of the groups of patients,
assuming a price difference of £600, of approximately: £111,000 for all patients;
£51,000 for long lesions; £53,000 for diabetes; and £59,000 for small vessels.
Assuming a price difference of £300 the resulting incremental costs per QALY for
each of the groups of patients are approximately: £38,000 for all patients; £3,000
for long lesions; £4,000 for diabetes; and £4,000 for small vessels.
4.3 Consideration of the evidence
4.3.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of DESs, having considered evidence on the nature of the condition
and the value placed on the benefits of DESs by people with coronary artery
disease, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It was also mindful of
the need to take account of the effective use of NHS resources.
4.3.2 The Committee considered the evidence on the clinical effectiveness of DESs in
the treatment of CHD. The Committee acknowledged that the clinical trials
showed that the use of any-type DESs reduced the rate of revascularisation in
the target lesions and the target vessels, at all follow-up time points up to
3 years, compared with any-type BMSs. The Committee noted not just the trial
data, but also the recent discussions on the effects of DESs on the risks of
thrombosis, MI, and mortality, and accepted the findings of the FDA review that
any-type DESs conferred no statistically significant benefits in mortality or acute
MI rates over any-type BMSs. The Committee concluded that the key benefit of
DESs is the reduction in rates of revascularisation in target lesions and target
vessels compared with BMSs.
4.3.3 The Committee considered whether there was any evidence to suggest that

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
there were differences in the clinical effectiveness of the various types of DESs. It
noted that only four of the eleven DESs had been compared with each other in
head-to-head RCTs. The majority of data comparing revascularisation rates were
between the SES (Cypher) and the PES (Taxus). The Committee noted that the
SES (Cypher) showed a statistically significant reduction in TLR, TVR and MACEs
compared with the PES (Taxus), at 9 months. It was also noted that at 1 year, for
the only outcome available, rates of TLR for the SES (Cypher) compared with the
PES (Taxus) showed no statistically significant difference. The Committee heard
testimony from the clinical specialists that different DESs are clinically
comparable and that, in practice, any of the DESs would be used, although those
with the greater evidence-base would be first choice.
4.3.4 The Committee considered the evidence to suggest that there were groups of
patients whose vessel anatomy was more likely to be subject to restenosis. The
absolute rate of revascularisation in these groups was greater than that of other
patients and they therefore had the potential to gain a greater relative benefit
from DESs than other patients, and this was taken into account by the sensitivity
analysis in the assessment group's economic model. The Committee considered
the risk factors derived by the Assessment Group using the Liverpool
Cardiothoracic Centre audit data, but it heard testimony from the clinical
specialists that small vessels (less than 3 mm in calibre), long lesions (longer than
15 mm) and diabetes were the risk factors most consistently reported and that
made most sense clinically. The Committee noted that, although the Assessment
Group's analysis of the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data did not prove
that any of these were statistically significant risk factors, taking account of other
studies, small-vessel disease and long lesions were better predictors of risk
groups than diabetes, and are particularly prevalent in patients with CAD who
also have diabetes. The Committee was also mindful of the regulatory concerns
about the 'off-label' use of DESs. The Committee concluded that small vessels
and long lesions should be considered as separate risk factors whereas diabetes
should not be considered as a separate risk factor.
4.3.5 The Committee noted that the Assessment Group's model was based on the
Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data that distinguished elective and non-
elective (emergency) patients. The Committee heard testimony from the clinical
specialists that in clinical practice the differences between these patient groups
specifically related to the mode of their presentation with acute coronary

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
syndromes, that is, non-ST-segment-elevated MI or unstable angina, and to the
use of adjunctive treatments, in particular anti-platelet therapy. Due to the lack of
other differences the Committee concluded that elective and non-elective
patients should be considered together but that the merging of the estimates
should take account of the proportions of elective and non-elective patients seen
in clinical practice.
4.3.6 In considering the cost effectiveness of DESs compared with BMSs, the
Committee noted that the model structure used by the Assessment Group was
appropriate. The Committee discussed the key parameters that drove the
Assessment Group's economic model. It considered the absolute rate of
revascularisation of BMSs in the total population of stented patients and noted
that the Assessment Group used 7.43% for patients in its base case in the
assessment report. The Committee heard testimony from the clinical specialists
that the rate of revascularisation of BMSs was around 12% in the published
literature. It noted that some of these published trials included protocol-driven
angiography and revascularisation and therefore were likely to be an
overestimate of actual revascularisation rates in clinical practice in the UK. The
Committee noted that the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data
revascularisation rates were lower than those from other data sets including the
BASKET trial (11%), which had not included protocol-driven angiography, and the
Scottish Registry (11.5%). The Committee discussed the range of possible values
for revascularisation and their relevance to UK practice and concluded that a rate
of 11% for the absolute rate of revascularisation was a reasonable estimate for UK
practice.
4.3.7 The Committee considered the relative reduction in the risk of target lesion
revascularisation with DESs. The Committee noted that the trial data typically
gave a relative risk reduction of 75%, but considered that this figure might over-
estimate the real-life benefit of DESs because it is derived from the trials that
included protocol-driven angiography and revascularisation. The Committee
heard that the BASKET trial, which had not included protocol-driven angiography,
had a relative risk reduction with DESs of 41% at 12 months. The Committee
looked at the adjusted relative risk reduction with DESs used by the Assessment
Group, and acknowledged that their approach reflected the number of patients,
and not the target lesions, that would benefit from DESs. The Committee noted
that the Assessment Group's figure was in line with the BASKET trial. The

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Committee heard from the clinical specialists that the most plausible relative risk
reduction with DESs from the clinical evidence was likely to be in the range 50%
to 60% for the base case and 61% to 70% for high-risk groups. Given the variation
in data the Committee considered a relative risk reduction with DESs over BMSs
of 55% in the base case, and of 65% in a sensitivity analysis for the higher risk
groups were the most plausible.
4.3.8 The Committee considered the mean number of stents used for each of the risk
groups from the Liverpool Cardiothoracic Centre audit data and concluded that
the estimate of mean number of stents per patient (1.6 for elective patients, 1.5
for non-elective patients) was likely to be a representative figure of the number
used in all patients in the UK and could be used as a base case for consideration
of the benefits of DESs.
4.3.9 The Committee was mindful of data in the literature on the mortality and
morbidity of CABG and repeat angiography. After reviewing the utility values in
the Assessment Group's model the Committee acknowledged the possibility that
there could be an additional disutility associated with CABG during the initial
6 weeks following the procedure compared with PCI. The Committee accepted
the Assessment Group's revisions for this parameter.
4.3.10 The Committee noted the current UK recommendation that clopidogrel should be
given for an additional 9 months in patients receiving a DES and it therefore
considered it appropriate that this should be taken account of in the cost-
effectiveness analysis. The Committee also accepted the consultation
suggestions that patients with acute coronary syndrome would already be
receiving 12 months' treatment with clopidogrel and that no additional costs
would be incurred in this population.
4.3.11 The Committee heard testimony from the clinical specialists and received
information during the consultation period that in some areas procurement
arrangements had resulted in a price difference of £300 for DESs over BMSs. The
Committee also received information that although no nationally procured price
currently existed for DESs, price differences that were less than £300 did exist in
some regions. The Committee agreed that as this price difference existed in
some regions, it was reasonable to assume that DESs could be procured in this
way across all regions within the NHS and, therefore, it could be considered as an

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
appropriate costing option in its considerations.
4.3.12 After agreeing on the parameters to use in the Assessment Group's model, the
Committee discussed the resulting ICERs for the base case and risk groups,
assuming:
• the absolute risk of revascularisation with BMSs for the total population is
11%, with resulting risks of revascularisation for small vessels of 19% and for
long lesions of 11.7%
• the mean number of stents per patient is 1.571
• the relative risk reduction with DESs for the base case is 55% for the total
population, and 65% for patients with small vessels and long lesions
• price differences of DESs over BMSs of £600 and £300.
At a relative risk reduction of 55% with DESs, the resulting ICER for the total
population of patients was associated with a cost per QALY of approximately
£171,000 at a price difference of £600 and £74,000 at a price difference of
£300. For the higher risk groups of patients (that is, those with long lesions
and those with small vessels) using a DES, with a relative risk reduction of
65%, the resulting ICERs were associated with costs per QALYs of £126,000
and £95,000, respectively, at a price difference of £600 and £47,000 and
£25,000, respectively, at a price difference of £300.
4.3.13 Reflecting the testimony of the clinical specialists and the comments received
during consultation, the Committee noted the small differences in the key
parameters between those that the Committee had previously agreed and those
suggested by BCIS. The Committee noted that the ICERs resulting from using the
parameter values suggested by the BCIS into the Assessment Group's model for
a price difference of £600 were associated with costs per QALYs of
approximately: £111,000 for all patients; £51,000 for long lesions; £53,000 for
diabetes; and £59,000 for small vessels. For a price difference of £300 the
resulting ICERs were associated with costs per QALYs below £5,000 for patients
with small vessels and long lesions. The Committee was not, however, persuaded
that all of the parameter values suggested by BCIS were plausible, but it agreed
that the percentages of elective and non-elective patients at presentation should
be 57% elective to 43% non-elective. The Committee noted that taking account

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
of this assumption would decrease the ICERs seen in the updated analysis for
long lesions and small vessels (see 4.3.12), which means that, at a price
difference of £300, the plausible ICERs would be much lower than cost per
QALYs of £47,000 and £25,000, respectively.
4.3.14 The Committee agreed that DESs could not be considered a cost-effective use of
NHS resources at a price difference of £600. After considering the alternative
parameter values presented by the Assessment Group and BCIS, the Committee
concluded that on balance at a price difference between DESs and BMSs of not
more than £300, DESs could be considered a cost effective option in patients
with small vessels and long lesions, and should be recommended for use in these
patient groups. The Committee's decision was based on a price difference of
£300 between BMSs and DESs. The Committee noted that procurement
arrangements for DESs at a price difference of £300 was already in place within
many NHS regions and achievable across the NHS as a whole. The Committee
understood that the mean absolute price of a BMS, to the NHS, was £131.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has coronary artery disease and the healthcare professional responsible
for their care thinks that drug-eluting stents is the right treatment, it should be
available for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
6 Recommendations for further research
6.1 The Committee noted that there are a number of trials under way comparing the
clinical effectiveness of DESs with their equivalent BMS and/or with other DESs at
longer follow-up periods.

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
7 Appraisal Committee members and NICE
project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committee is a standing advisory committee of NICE. Its members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. The Appraisal Committee meets three times
a month except in December, when there are no meetings. The Committee membership is
split into three branches, each with a chair and vice-chair. Each branch considers its own
list of technologies and ongoing topics are not moved between the branches.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Professor Keith Abrams
Professor of Medical Statistics, University of Leicester
Dr Darren Ashcroft
Senior Clinical Lecturer, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Manchester
Dr Jeffrey Aronson
Reader in Clinical Pharmacology, University Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Radcliffe Infirmary
Professor David Barnett
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Leicester
Dr Peter Barry

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Consultant in Paediatric Intensive Care, Leicester Royal Infirmary
Mr Brian Buckley
Lay Member
Professor Stirling Bryan
Director, Health Economics Facility, University of Birmingham
Professor John Cairns
Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Professor Mike Campbell
Statistician, University of Sheffield
Professor David Chadwick
Professor of Neurology, Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery
Dr Mark Chakravarty
Industry Member
Dr Peter I Clark
Consultant Medical Oncologist, Clatterbridge Centre for Oncology, Merseyside
Dr Mike Davies
Consultant Physician, University Department of Medicine and Metabolism, Manchester
Royal Infirmary
Professor Jack Dowie
Health Economist, London School of Hygiene
Ms Lynn Field
Nurse Director, Pan Birmingham Cancer Network
Professor Christopher Fowler
Professor of Surgical Education and Honorary Consultant Urologist
Mrs Barbara Gerggains
Lay Member

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Dr Fergus Gleeson
Consultant Radiologist, The Churchill Hospital, Oxford
Ms Sally Gooch
Independent Healthcare Consultant
Mr Sanjay Gupta
Stroke Services Manager, Basildon and Thurrock University Hospitals NHS Trust
Professor Philip Home
Professor of Diabetes Medicine, University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Dr Peter Jackson
Clinical Pharmacologist, University of Sheffield
Professor Peter Jones
Professor of Statistics and Dean, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University
Dr Mike Laker
Medical Director, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Trust
Dr George Levvy
Chief Executive, Motor Neurone Disease Association, Northampton
Ms Rachel Lewis
Nurse Advisor to the Department of Health
Mr Terence Lewis
Lay Member
Professor Gary McVeigh
Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine, Queen's University Belfast
Professor Jonathan Michaels
Professor of Vascular Surgery, University of Sheffield
Dr Neil Milner
General Practitioner, Sheffield

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Dr Ruairidh Milne
Senior Lecturer in Health Technology Assessment, National Coordinating Centre for Health
Technology
Dr John Pounsford
Consultant Physician, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol
Dr Rosalind Ramsay
Consultant Psychiatrist, Adult Mental Health Services, Maudsley Hospital
Dr Stephen Saltissi
Consultant Physician, The Royal Liverpool University Hospital
Mr Miles Scott
Chief Executive, Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Lindsay Smith
General Practitioner, East Somerset Research Consortium
Mr Roderick Smith
Director of Finance, Adur, Arun and Worthing PCT
Mr Cliff Snelling
Lay Member
Dr Ken Stein
Senior Lecturer, Peninsula Technology Assessment Group (PenTAG), University of Exeter
Professor Andrew Stevens (Chair)
Professor of Public Health, University of Birmingham
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of one or more health
technology analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and
a project manager.
Joanna Richardson

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Technical Lead
Dr Elisabeth George
Technical Adviser
Reetan Patel
Project Manager

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
8 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The assessment report for this appraisal was prepared by Liverpool Reviews and
Implementation Group, University of Liverpool.
• Hill R, Boland A, Dickson R, et al. Drug-eluting stents: a systematic review and
economic evaluation, November 2005
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal. They
were invited to comment on the draft scope, assessment report and the appraisal
consultation document (ACD). Manufacturers or sponsors and professional or specialist
and patient or carer groups were also invited to make written submissions and have the
opportunity to appeal against the final appraisal determination.
Manufacturers or sponsors:
• Abbott Vascular Devices Ltd
• Biotronik UK Ltd
• Boston Scientific
• Cordis Corporation
• Guidant
• Kiwimed Ltd
• Medtronic AVE
• Sorin Biomedica UK Ltd
Professional or specialist and patient or carer groups:
• British Association for Nursing in Cardiac Care
• British Cardiac Society
• British Cardiovascular Intervention Society

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
• British Heart Foundation
• Royal College of Nursing
• Royal College of Physicians
• Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh
• Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
• Society for Cardiological Science and Technology
• Society of Cardiothoracic Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland
• Action Heart
• British Cardiac Patients Association
• Coronary Prevention Group
• HEART UK
• National Heart Forum
• Heart Care Partnership (UK)
Other consultees
• Barnet PCT
• Central Derby PCT
• Department of Health
Welsh Assembly Government Commentator organisations (without the right of appeal):
• Association of British Health-Care Industries (ABHI)
• British Cardiovascular Industry Association (BCIA)
• BNF
• Board of Community Health Councils in Wales
• EUCOMED

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
• Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
• National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care
• National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions
• National Public Health Service for Wales
• NHS Confederation
• NHS Purchasing and Supplies Agency
• NHS Quality Improvement Scotland
The following individuals were selected from clinical specialist and patient advocate
nominations from the non-manufacturer/sponsor consultees and commentators. They
participated in the Appraisal Committee discussions and provided evidence to inform the
Appraisal Committee's deliberations. They gave their expert personal view on drug-eluting
stents by attending the initial Committee discussion and/or providing written evidence to
the Committee. They were also invited to comment on the ACD.
• Mrs Jill Bishop, Cardiac Catheter Theatre Manager, nominated by the British
Association of Nursing in Cardiac Care – clinical specialist (attended in 2006 and
2007).
• Mr Ron Box, nominated by the Heart Care Partnership – patient expert (attended in
2006 and 2007).
• Dr Martyn Thomas, Consultant Cardiologist, nominated by the British Cardiovascular
Intervention Society – clinical specialist (attended in 2006 and 2007).
• Dr AH Gershlick, Consultant Cardiologist, nominated by the British Heart Foundation
and the British Cardiac Society – clinical specialist (attended in 2006 and 2007).
• Dr Keith Oldroyd, Consultant Cardiologist, nominated by NHS Quality Improvement
Scotland – clinical specialist (attended in 2006 and 2007).
• Rev Dan Paterson, nominated by the Heart Care Partnership – patient expert
(attended in 2006).
• Ms Liz Clarke, nominated by the Heart Care Partnership – patient expert (attended in
2007).

Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease (TA152)
Update information
November 2020: Recommendation 1.1 was updated when NICE's guideline on acute
coronary syndromes was published.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3930-5
