=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "edoxaban-for-preventing-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-people-with-nonvalvular-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82602669987781.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:57.256254",
  "file_size_bytes": 196207,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/edoxaban-for-preventing-stroke-and-systemic-embolism-in-people-with-nonvalvular-atrial-fibrillation-pdf-82602669987781.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Edoxaban for preventing
stroke and systemic
embolism in people with
non-valvular atrial
fibrillation
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 23 September 2015
Last updated: 2 July 2021
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta355
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 3 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Contents
1 Recommendations ................................................................................................................... 4
2 The technology ........................................................................................................................ 5
3 The company's submission .................................................................................................... 6
Clinical effectiveness ............................................................................................................................ 6
Cost effectiveness ................................................................................................................................ 11
4 Consideration of the evidence ............................................................................................... 20
Clinical effectiveness ............................................................................................................................ 20
Cost effectiveness ................................................................................................................................ 23
5 Implementation ........................................................................................................................ 27
6 Appraisal Committee members, guideline representatives and NICE project team ......... 28
Appraisal Committee members ........................................................................................................... 28
NICE project team ................................................................................................................................. 29
7 Sources of evidence considered by the Committee ............................................................ 31
Update information .................................................................................................................... 34
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 4 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
This guidance should be read in conjunction with NG196.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Edoxaban is recommended, within its marketing authorisation, as an option for
preventing stroke and systemic embolism in adults with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation with one or more risk factors, including:
• congestive heart failure
• hypertension
• diabetes
• prior stroke or transient ischaemic attack
• age 75 years or older.
1.2 Decide whether to start treatment with edoxaban after an informed discussion
with the person about its risks and benefits compared with warfarin, apixaban,
dabigatran etexilate and rivaroxaban. For people taking warfarin, consider the
potential risks and benefits of switching to edoxaban taking into account their
level of international normalised ratio (INR) control.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 5 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
2 The technology
2.1 Edoxaban (Lixiana, Daiichi Sankyo) is an anticoagulant that directly inhibits factor
X (factor Xa), which is a key component in the formation of blood clots. It is
administered orally. Edoxaban has a marketing authorisation for the 'prevention of
stroke and systemic embolism in adult patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation
(NVAF) with one or more risk factors, such as congestive heart failure,
hypertension, age 75 years or older, diabetes mellitus, prior stroke or transient
ischaemic attack (TIA).' The summary of product characteristics states that the
recommended dose is 60 mg once daily. The recommended dose is 30 mg once
daily in people with one or more of the following clinical factors: moderate or
severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance 15 to 50 ml/min); body weight of
60 kg or less; concomitant use of the P-glycoprotein inhibitors ciclosporin,
dronedarone, erythromycin or ketoconazole.
2.2 The summary of product characteristics includes the following adverse reactions
for edoxaban: bleeding, anaemia, nausea, rash, hepatobiliary disorders (increased
blood bilirubin and gamma-glutamyl transferase) and abnormal liver function test.
For full details of adverse reactions and contraindications, see the summary of
product characteristics.
2.3 Edoxaban costs £58.80 for a 28-tablet pack (60 mg or 30 mg) and the daily cost
of treatment is £2.10 (excluding VAT). Costs may vary in different settings
because of negotiated procurement discounts.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 6 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
3 The company's submission
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by Daiichi Sankyo and a review
of this submission by the Evidence Review Group (ERG).
Clinical effectiveness
Overview of clinical trials
3.1 The primary source of evidence was ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, a randomised,
international (46 countries, including 31 centres in the UK) double-blind,
double-dummy, parallel-group, non-inferiority trial comparing edoxaban with
warfarin. It included a total of 21,105 people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and
a moderate-to-high risk of stroke, defined as a CHADS score of 2 or more
2
(CHADS is a scoring system that measures risk factors associated with
2
congestive heart failure, hypertension, age, diabetes and stroke). People were
randomly assigned to treatment with low-dose edoxaban (30 mg, n=7,034),
high-dose edoxaban (60 mg, n=7,035) or warfarin (n=7,036). People randomised
to edoxaban who were at increased risk of bleeding because of higher drug
exposure (those weighing 60 kg or less, with creatinine clearance 30 to 50 ml/
min, or having concomitant treatment with potent permeability glycoprotein
inhibitors) had the dose reduced, either at randomisation or during the study, to
15 mg in the low-dose group and to 30 mg in the high-dose group. The clinical
trial results presented below focus on the higher dose treatment arm because
this is the recommended dose in the marketing authorisation. This is referred to
throughout as the 60 mg/30 mg treatment arm because it included people who
were given 30 mg because of clinical factors. The dose in the warfarin group was
adjusted to maintain an international normalised ratio [INR] of 2.0 to 3.0, and
people in the trial were 'well controlled' on warfarin (median time spent in the
therapeutic range [TTR] was 68.4%).
3.2 Patient characteristics were similar between the treatment groups including age,
sex, ethnicity, risk factors, CHADS score and renal function. The mean CHADS
2 2
score was 2.8 and approximately 53% of patients had a CHADS score of 3 or
2
more, indicating that the patient population was at a moderate-to-high risk of
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 7 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
stroke. The median age of people in the study was 72 years and 62% were male.
3.3 The primary efficacy outcome was time to the first stroke (ischaemic or
haemorrhagic) or systemic embolic event. People in the trial continued treatment
and were followed up until approximately 672 primary efficacy endpoint events
had been collected, which provided 87% power for confirming non-inferiority for
each edoxaban regimen. A non-inferiority test using the modified intent-to-treat
(mITT) population for the on-treatment period was pre-specified in the statistical
analysis plan. To satisfy non-inferiority, the upper boundary of the one-sided
97.5% confidence interval for the hazard ratio of the primary efficacy endpoint
comparing edoxaban with warfarin could not exceed 1.38, which was an estimate
that preserved at least 50% of the benefit of warfarin over placebo. If edoxaban
was shown to be statistically significantly non-inferior to warfarin, a superiority
test would be performed using the intent-to-treat (ITT) population and the overall
study period.
Clinical trial results
3.4 For the primary efficacy outcome (prevention of stroke or systemic embolic
event) in the mITT analysis set (on-treatment and overall study period), edoxaban
60 mg/30 mg met the criteria for non-inferiority compared with warfarin. Stroke
or a systemic embolic event occurred in 182 people in the edoxaban 60 mg/
30 mg arm of the trial (1.18% per year) compared with 232 people in the warfarin
arm (1.50% per year, hazard ratio [HR] 0.79, 97.5% confidence interval [CI] 0.63 to
0.99, p<0.001 for non-inferiority). In the pre-specified superiority analysis
performed in the ITT analysis set (overall study period), the rate of stroke or
systemic embolic event was 1.57% per year in the edoxaban 60 mg/30 mg arm
compared with 1.80% in the warfarin arm (HR compared with warfarin 0.87; 97.5%
CI 0.73 to 1.04, p=0.08 for superiority). Results for the mITT overall study period
were consistent with those in the ITT overall study period.
3.5 The company presented results for the analyses of the components of the
primary endpoint (stroke and systemic embolism) and the subcomponents of
stroke (ischaemic, haemorrhagic, fatal and disabling) for the mITT analysis set
(on-treatment period, and overall study period) and the ITT analysis overall study
period. For the mITT overall study period, edoxaban was shown to be superior to
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 8 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
warfarin for haemorrhagic stroke (p=0.001). The results were similar for the mITT
population, the on-treatment period analysis and the ITT population analysis.
3.6 The company presented analyses for the primary efficacy results using the mITT
analysis set (overall study period) for subgroups according to risk of stroke
(defined by CHADS score) and renal function (creatinine clearance). The
2
subgroup analysis for risk of stroke demonstrated that, compared with warfarin,
the hazard ratio for the edoxaban 60 mg/30 mg dose was stable and non-inferior
across CHADS scores of 2 to 6. The subgroup analysis for renal function across
2
3 categories of creatinine clearance (normal renal function 80 ml/min or more;
mild renal impairment more than 50 to less than 80 ml/min; and moderate renal
impairment 30 to 50 ml/min), suggested that renal function had a significant
impact on the efficacy of edoxaban in comparison to warfarin (p=0.0042). This
result was shown to be consistent across analysis sets. The hazard ratios for the
primary efficacy endpoint were 0.68 (95% CI 0.54 to 0.85) and 0.86 (95% CI 0.63
to 1.17) for the subgroups of people with mild or moderate renal impairment,
respectively. In contrast, the relative risk of stroke or systemic embolic event was
higher with edoxaban than with warfarin in the subgroup of people with normal
renal function (HR 1.31, 95% CI 0.96 to 1.79). The company noted that this
analysis should be treated with caution because a variety of factors (including an
unusually low event rate in the warfarin group, and potential imbalances between
treatment groups because of randomisation not being performed within
subgroups) could have contributed to the observed hazard ratio for stroke or
systemic embolic event compared with warfarin in the subgroup of people with
normal renal function.
3.7 The company also did an analysis comparing centre-level TTR above and below
60%. The p value for interaction was 0.0361 which indicated that in centres with
a TTR above 60% edoxaban had a similar effect compared with warfarin to that
observed in the total study population, but there was a significant reduction in
risk of stroke and systemic embolism in the subgroup with a centre-level TTR of
less than 60%. When the TTR data were examined by quartiles, however, the
p value for interaction was 0.50.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 9 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Health-related quality of life
3.8 Health-related quality of life data were collected in ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 using the
self-administered EQ-5D questionnaire at baseline and then every 3 months, until
the end of the study. Approximately 60% of patients (11,995 patients) provided
quality-of-life data; 164 (1.4%) patients were from the UK.
ERG comments on the clinical effectiveness data
3.9 The ERG noted that the statistically significant result for non-inferiority in
ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 was driven largely by a reduction in haemorrhagic stroke
events in patients treated with edoxaban, but there was no statistically significant
difference between edoxaban and warfarin for any other listed component or
subcomponent.
3.10 The ERG commented that the estimate of treatment effect (hazard ratio) for the
primary outcome may not be reliable because the assumption of proportional
hazards between treatment with edoxaban or warfarin for haemorrhagic stroke
(one of the components of the primary outcome) appeared to be violated. The
hazard trend in the warfarin group changed sharply at 6 months, in comparison
with a smooth hazard trend over time in the edoxaban group.
3.11 The ERG noted that the results of the analysis for centre-level TTR suggested
that the efficacy of edoxaban in comparison to warfarin is significantly greater in
the subgroup of centres achieving TTR of less than 60%, but this was not
consistent across all analysis sets. There was no significant difference in the
results from centres with a TTR of less than or greater than 60% when the
analysis was conducted using the mITT population and the on-treatment
observation period. The ERG therefore suggested that the finding that
centre-level TTR may affect the efficacy of edoxaban in comparison to warfarin
may be spurious.
3.12 The ERG stated that the health-related quality of life data provided during the
clarification process were difficult to interpret because of the low response rate
and incomplete analysis. The ERG therefore suggested that it was difficult to
draw any firm conclusions about any differences in patients' experiences that are
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 10 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
attributable to the choice of treatment.
Adverse effects of treatment
3.13 The company presented the results of the safety analyses, which included all
people who had at least 1 dose of study drug for the on-treatment period in
ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. In the principal safety analysis for the edoxaban 60 mg/
30 mg arm compared with warfarin, the company stated that edoxaban had a
significantly reduced rate of major bleeding (HR 0.80, 95% CI 0.71 to 0.91;
p<0.001) and of several secondary bleeding endpoints including intracranial,
fatal, clinically relevant non-major and life-threatening bleeds (p≤0.01 for all
comparisons). However, the company highlighted that major gastrointestinal
bleeding occurred slightly more frequently in the edoxaban 60 mg/30 mg arm
than in the warfarin arm (annualised rate of 1.51% compared with 1.23%,
respectively; HR 1.23 [1.02 to 1.50]; p=0.03).
3.14 The company stated that the 5 most frequent treatment-emergent adverse
events in the edoxaban or warfarin groups were urinary tract infections,
nasopharyngitis, bronchitis, dizziness and peripheral oedema. The company
presented subgroup analyses for the primary safety outcome by centre-level TTR
and by risk of stroke (as defined by CHADS ), which were consistent with the
2
overall population.
Network meta-analysis
3.15 The company did not find any head-to-head studies that compared edoxaban
with rivaroxaban, dabigatran etexilate or apixaban so it did a network
meta-analysis to estimate the relative efficacy and safety of edoxaban for
treating atrial fibrillation, that included 4 trials: ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, and 3 trials
of other newer oral anticoagulants (apixaban 5 mg twice-daily [ARISTOTLE];
dabigatran etexilate 150 mg twice-daily or 110 mg twice-daily [RE-LY]; and
rivaroxaban 20 mg once-daily [ROCKET-AF]). All 4 RCTs had a warfarin treatment
arm. Because of significant differences in the patient characteristics and trial
design between the 4 trials (for example, ARISTOTLE and RE-LY included people
with a CHADS2 score of 1 or more, whereas the CHADS2 score was 2 or more in
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 11 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
both ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 and ROCKET-AF) only data from patients with a
CHADS score of 2 or more from RE-LY and ARISTOTLE were used in the network
2
meta-analyses.
3.16 The results of the meta-analysis demonstrated that for the composite endpoint
of stroke and systemic embolism, efficacy was similar for high-dose edoxaban
compared to other newer oral anticoagulants, but edoxaban significantly reduced
major bleeding risk by 24%, 28%, and 17% compared to rivaroxaban, dabigatran
etexilate 150 mg and dabigatran etexilate 110 mg, respectively. Major bleeding
rates were similar between high-dose edoxaban and apixaban.
Evidence Review Group's comments on the network
meta-analysis
3.17 The ERG considered that the key characteristics of the trials (study population,
design, outcome measures; and effect modifiers such as age, disease severity,
and duration of follow-up) included in the network meta-analyses were
sufficiently similar to justify combining the results. The company's approach used
annualised event rates and the ERG considered that this approach minimised any
potential bias resulting from differences in trial duration, which ranged from
1.8 years in ARISTOTLE (apixaban) to 2.8 years in ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48
(edoxaban).
3.18 The ERG noted that in addition to the violation of the proportional hazards
assumption for some end points within ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, it was also violated
within trials of the other 3 newer oral anticoagulants, and in the warfarin groups
of the 4 trials included in the evidence network. The ERG highlighted that this
meant the hazard ratios from the network meta-analysis were not reliable and
should not be used to inform the company's economic model.
Cost effectiveness
3.19 The company developed a Markov cohort model to compare edoxaban with
warfarin, apixaban, rivaroxaban and dabigatran etexilate for preventing stroke
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 12 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation with 1 or
more risk factors, such as congestive heart failure, hypertension, age 75 years or
more, diabetes, previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack, and a CHADS
2
score of at least 2 (the baseline characteristics of ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48). The
model consisted of 18 health states (patients entering the model with 'stable AF'),
with 1-month cycles and a 30-year (remaining lifetime) time horizon from a
starting age of 71 years. The company conducted the analysis from the
perspective of the NHS and personal social services, and discounted costs and
health effects at an annual rate of 3.5%. A half-cycle correction was applied to
both costs and QALYs (with the exception of drug costs). The model design was
based on previous economic analyses that were submitted to NICE (for example,
apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-
valvular atrial fibrillation).
3.20 The health states in the company's model were defined by the clinical events
considered to have a permanent impact on patients and were assumed to have
an initial, as well a long-term, impact on costs, quality of life and mortality. The
health states captured the main thrombotic events and adverse events of
treatment including haemorrhagic and ischaemic stroke (separated into mild,
moderate and severe), systemic embolism and myocardial infarction. Health
states were further subdivided into an initial health state (in which costs and
quality of life associated with the acute event and the case fatality rate were
applied in the month after the initial event), and a long-term health state in which
ongoing event costs, quality of life and mortality were applied in each monthly
cycle. Events that were considered to have no long-term impact in the model
were other intracranial haemorrhage, non-intracranial haemorrhage major bleeds,
clinically relevant non-major bleeds, and transient ischaemic attack. In the model,
these events incurred costs and a disutility for the length of the event.
3.21 The monthly probability of each clinical outcome for edoxaban was estimated
from annual event rates from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. The transition probabilities for
the comparators were obtained by applying the hazard ratio from the network
meta-analysis for the intervention to the baseline probability. When there were no
available data for a clinical outcome, it was assumed that the hazard ratio was
equivalent to the hazard ratio estimated in the 'all patients' analysis. If there were
no available data in the 'all patients' analysis, the hazard ratio was assumed to be
1.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 13 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
3.22 In the model, people could permanently stop or switch treatment after an
ischaemic stroke or a haemorrhagic stroke. After stopping treatment and
switching to a new therapy, the transition probability (of health state and event)
did not change to reflect the new therapy. The company assumed that people
could not stop or switch treatment for any other reason because there would be
no difference between treatment groups.
3.23 The adverse events considered in the company's model were non-intracranial
haemorrhage major bleed, clinically relevant non-major bleeds, other intracranial
haemorrhage, and transient ischaemic attack (assumed to be transient on clinical
advice).
ERG comments
3.24 The ERG considered that the assumption of proportionality that underpinned the
network meta-analysis had been shown to be violated both within and between
trials (see also sections 3.10 and 3.18). The ERG highlighted that this meant the
hazard ratios used to inform the company's economic model were therefore
unreliable.
3.25 The ERG highlighted that the model predicted that, of a cohort of 1000 people
with non-valvular atrial fibrillation having warfarin, there will be 157 stroke events.
Using the company's approach to applying the risk of acute-stroke mortality,
approximately 15 (9.6%) of these would be fatal, which is substantially less than
the 16.8% reported in the study by Janes. The ERG assessed the impact of
applying the acute mortality rates reported by Janes to all patients experiencing
a stroke (ischaemic stroke and haemorrhagic stroke analysed separately; see
sections 3.40 and 3.41). The ERG noted that mortality data from ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48 were not used in the model and no rationale for this was given by the
company. The ERG considered it more appropriate to use mortality data from
ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. Therefore, in its exploratory analyses, the ERG extracted
acute mortality data for ischaemic stroke and haemorrhagic stroke from the
clinical study report (CSR50, page 132) and pooled it across the warfarin and
edoxaban groups of the trial (see sections 3.40 and 3.41).
3.26 The ERG highlighted that the model overestimated overall survival for both
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 14 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
treatment groups compared with ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, and that this potentially
underestimated the relative effectiveness of edoxaban compared to warfarin.
Utility values
3.27 The baseline quality of life for the health state of stable atrial fibrillation in the
company's model (0.78) was taken from a study of patients with atrial fibrillation
having warfarin in the UK (Khan, 2004). In the sensitivity analyses, health-related
quality of life data from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 were used (0.836). Health-related
quality of life declined over time based on an adjustment for cohort aging
(-0.00029 per year) to reflect the impact of age and thrombotic events on a
patient's quality of life. Utility estimates for mild, moderate and severe stroke
were derived from a published study by Gage (1996). The company assumed that
patients who have a stroke, myocardial infarction or systemic embolic event
experience a permanent decrement to their health-related quality of life.
ERG comments
3.28 The ERG noted that the base case utility value for the stable atrial fibrillation
health state had been derived from a UK study by Khan which had a modest
sample size of 125 patients, with a low response rate, and was designed to
assess the effectiveness of an anticoagulation education programme and
self-monitoring of patients with atrial fibrillation taking warfarin. The ERG did not
consider this to be representative of a general atrial fibrillation population and it
preferred the use of EQ-5D data collected in ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48.
3.29 The ERG highlighted that the age-related utility decrement in the model
(-0.00029 per annum) based on self-reported health status of a US population
and valued using the UK tariff may not be generalisable to a UK population. The
ERG preferred to use EQ-5D data from the Health Survey for England in its
analysis, because this was a more representative population for the UK. This
produced an estimated annual utility decrement of -0.00646.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 15 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Resource use
3.30 The company used the BNF 68 (July 2014) to obtain drug costs in the model. All
costs for the health states of ischaemic stroke, haemorrhagic stroke and
systemic embolic events were based on the Oxford Vascular study (OXVASC,
2013), a large study of healthcare costs after stroke in patients with atrial
fibrillation. Costs associated with myocardial infarction were based on NHS
reference costs. Post-myocardial infarction costs were based on the Electronic
Drug Tariff and the BNF 68 (July 2014).
3.31 The monitoring costs for warfarin patients were adapted from the unit cost of
anticoagulation monitoring used in the NHS Costing Template for dabigatran
etexilate, which was also used in the apixaban technology appraisal. These costs
were inflated to 2013 costs using the Personal Social Services Research Unit
Hospital and Community Services Health Index (HCHS). The model assumed that
34% of patients will be seen in a secondary care setting (at a cost of £323.10)
with the remaining 66% seen in primary care (£235.11) giving a weighted average
annual cost of £265.03.
ERG comments on resource use
3.32 The ERG noted that although the cost of warfarin used in the company's model
(£0.11 per day) was estimated using the list prices reported in the BNF, it is widely
available to the NHS at discounted prices. The ERG did an exploratory analysis
using the warfarin cost estimated from figures reported in the Department of
Health's eMit database (£0.0375).
Company's base-case results and sensitivity analysis
3.33 In the company's deterministic base case analysis (based on people with CHADS
2
≥2), edoxaban, dabigatran etexilate 110 mg, apixaban and rivaroxaban were
strictly dominated (less effective and more costly) by dabigatran etexilate
150 mg, which had an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £7,645 per
additional QALY gained compared to warfarin (table 1).
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 16 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Table 1 Company's incremental base case (deterministic results)
Total Inc ICER vs warfarin ICER per QALY gained
Technology Total costs Inc costs
QALYs* QALYs (QALYs) (£)
Warfarin £13,413 6.32 – – – –
Dabigatran etexilate
£15,563 6.60 £2,150 0.28 £7,645 £7,645
150 mg
Strictly
Apixaban £15,940 6.59 £377 -0.01 £9,383
dominated
Strictly
Edoxaban £15,957 6.52 £17 -0.07 £12,881
dominated
Strictly
Dabigatran etexilate
£16,074 6.51 £117 0.00 £13,565
110 mg dominated
Strictly
Rivaroxaban £16,744 6.44 £670 -0.08 £28,180
dominated
Abbreviations: ICER, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; Inc, incremental; QALYs, quality-
adjusted life years.
3.34 The company presented cost-effectiveness acceptability curves for the
incremental analysis, which showed that the probability of edoxaban being cost
effective was 2.9% at a maximum acceptable ICER of £20,000 per QALY gained,
and 3.4% at a threshold of £30,000 per QALY gained. Warfarin had the highest
probability (36.8%) of being the most cost-effective option at a threshold of
£20,000 per QALY gained. At a maximum acceptable ICER of £30,000 per QALY
gained, apixaban had the highest probability of being the most cost-effective
option (32.6%). In the pairwise comparison of edoxaban compared with warfarin,
the probability of edoxaban being cost effective was 47.1% at a maximum
acceptable ICER of £20,000 per QALY gained and 57.1% at a maximum
acceptable ICER of £30,000 per QALY gained.
3.35 The company did 14 pairwise deterministic sensitivity analyses. It highlighted that
the variables that had the most impact on the deterministic base case results
were patients' starting age (lower limit 52.1 years, upper limit 89.1 years), cost of
treatment, monitoring costs for patients treated with edoxaban (baseline £0,
upper limit £26.50), and the utility values of stable atrial fibrillation, post-event
myocardial infarction and haemorrhagic stroke.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 17 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
3.36 The company presented results of subgroup analyses for people with a CHADS
2
score of 3 or more, or with a centre-level TTR of 60% or more. In people with a
CHADS score of 3 or more edoxaban, dabigatran etexilate 110 mg, and
2
rivaroxaban were strictly dominated (less effective and more costly) by apixaban
and dabigatran etexilate 150 mg. For the subgroup of people with a centre-level
TTR of 60% or more, edoxaban, dabigatran etexilate 110 mg, apixaban and
rivaroxaban were strictly dominated by dabigatran etexilate 150 mg, which had an
ICER of £11,738 per additional QALY gained compared to warfarin.
ERG's comments on the company's cost-effectiveness model
results
3.37 Results from the company's base case probabilistic analysis were not explicitly
included in the submission. However, they were calculated by the ERG using the
company's model (table 2). Edoxaban, dabigatran etexilate 110 mg and
rivaroxaban were strictly dominated by dabigatran etexilate 150 mg and apixaban
extendedly dominated dabigatran etexilate 150 mg (more effective and less
costly) with an ICER of £13,036 per QALY gained compared to warfarin.
Table 2 ERG's calculation of the probabilistic base case results (extracted from the
company's model)
– Costs QALYs Incremental Cost Incremental QALY ICER
Warfarin £12,868 6.56 – – –
Rivaroxaban £16,313 6.65 – – Dominated
Dabigatran etexilate 110 mg £15,732 6.66 – – Dominated
Edoxaban £15,451 6.72 – – Dominated
Dabigatran etexilate 150 mg £15,293 6.75 £2,425 0.185 Extendedly dominated
Apixaban £15,531 6.77 £2,662 0.204 £13,036
Abbreviations: ICER, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio; Inc, incremental; QALYs, quality-
adjusted life years.
3.38 The ERG highlighted that in the company's probabilistic and deterministic
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 18 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
analyses edoxaban was dominated (less effective and more costly than at least
one alternative treatment). However, in the deterministic analysis dabigatran
etexilate 150 mg dominated (was less costly and more effective than) the other,
newer, oral anticoagulants, whereas in the probabilistic analysis apixaban
dominated dabigatran etexilate 150 mg. The ERG considered that this was
because of the very small differences in QALYs between dabigatran etexilate
150 mg and apixaban in all analyses. In addition, the ERG noted that the results of
the probabilistic analysis were not completely stable (repeated runs of the same
analyses gave slightly different results).
3.39 The ERG considered that because the subgroup analyses for patients with a
CHADS of 3 or more and for centre-level TTR of 60% or more were based on
2
very limited data, the extent to which these results were truly representative of
effects in these subgroups is unclear.
ERG's exploratory analyses
3.40 The ERG noted that the economic model appeared to be robust to the sensitivity
analyses carried out by the company. The ERG carried out 17 individual
exploratory scenarios, which used its preferred alternative parameter values or
formulae. The ERG also combined multiple parameters to give their preferred
base case, which included:
• corrected implementation of age-related utility adjustment
• ERG-sourced utility values for systemic embolism
• alternative utility values for myocardial infarction, transient ischaemic attack
and ERG-sourced utility values for acute and post-stroke health states
• assumption regarding the method used to switch patient medication from
dabigatran 150 mg to 110 mg at age 80
• assumption regarding treatment discontinuation after haemorrhagic stroke
• acute stroke fatality rate applied to all stroke events (16.8% for ischaemic and
31.6% for haemorrhagic stroke)
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 19 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
• trial data on acute stroke case fatality rates used for all ischaemic and
haemorrhagic strokes
• age-adjusted utility decrement per year amended to -0.00646 instead of
-0.00029
• the daily cost of warfarin amended
• the ENGAGE trial HR applied for haemorrhagic stroke.
3.41 None of the ERG's amendments to the company's model changed the results of
the full incremental analyses; edoxaban was more expensive and less effective
than at least one of the alternative treatments. When all of the ERG's preferred
values were used in the model the pairwise deterministic ICER for the comparison
of edoxaban with warfarin was £16,008 per QALY gained, and the probabilistic
ICER was £22,079 per QALY gained. When additional alternative amendments
were included to reconcile the model survival outputs with the trial data, and to
reflect the changing age and sex distribution over time, this changed the
deterministic pairwise ICER to between approximately £15,176 and £15,807, and
the probabilistic ICER to between £21,728 and £23,634 per QALY gained.
3.42 See the committee papers for full details of the evidence.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 20 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
4 Consideration of the evidence
The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of edoxaban, having considered evidence on the nature of non-valvular
atrial fibrillation and the value placed on the benefits of edoxaban by people with the
condition, those who represent them, and clinical experts. It also took into account the
effective use of NHS resources.
4.1 The Committee heard from clinical and patient experts that the current standard
treatment for non-valvular atrial fibrillation is warfarin, although there is
increasing use of newer agents. The Committee was aware that non-valvular
atrial fibrillation is well-managed with warfarin for many people, but is associated
with a number of problems including the need for regular monitoring and dose
adjustment, and it has multiple food and drug interactions. The Committee heard
from the patient and clinical experts that the number of people being prescribed
anticoagulation treatment for atrial fibrillation is increasing following publication
of the NICE guideline on managing atrial fibrillation. This does not recommend
aspirin for the treatment of non-valvular atrial fibrillation, which has led to a
higher uptake of both warfarin and the newer oral anticoagulants. The Committee
concluded that both warfarin and the newer oral anticoagulants are relevant
comparators for edoxaban. The Committee accepted the limitations of warfarin
therapy and the considerable impact it may have on people who take it, and
recognised the potential benefits of edoxaban for people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation.
Clinical effectiveness
4.2 The Committee considered the clinical-effectiveness data from ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48, that compared edoxaban with warfarin. It considered that this trial
was of good quality and discussed whether the results were generalisable to
people with atrial fibrillation in the UK. The Committee noted that ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48, like other trials of newer anticoagulants, used CHADS to assess the
2
risk of stroke rather than CHADS -VASc, which is now used in clinical practice, as
2
recommended in the NICE guideline on managing atrial fibrillation. The
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 21 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Committee understood from the clinical expert that the CHADS -VASc scoring
2
system was developed to better define those who would benefit from
anticoagulation because a number people with a CHADS score of 1 would still
2
benefit. It also heard that although these people were not included in ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48, a lower baseline risk of stroke would not be expected to reduce the
relative efficacy of the treatment. In clinical practice, edoxaban is expected to be
offered in the same place in the treatment pathway as other anticoagulants (that
is, to women with a CHADS -VASc score of 2 and above, and to men with a score
2
of 1 or above), while taking bleeding risk into account. The Committee concluded
that the trial was well designed and generalisable to clinical practice.
4.3 The Committee considered the results of ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. It noted that the
primary efficacy outcome was a composite of stroke (both ischaemic and
haemorrhagic) and systemic embolism. However, ischaemic stroke and systemic
embolism could be considered direct treatment effects, whereas haemorrhagic
stroke was a bleeding outcome and therefore an adverse event. The Committee
noted that for the composite primary outcome, edoxaban was non-inferior to, but
not superior to, well-controlled warfarin (which was defined in the trial as a
median time in therapeutic range [TTR] of 68.4%). The Committee noted that
when the individual components of the primary outcome were considered
separately, there was only a statistically significant reduction in haemorrhagic
stroke with edoxaban compared with warfarin. The Committee concluded that
edoxaban was as clinically effective as warfarin for the primary efficacy outcome
of reducing stroke (ischaemic and haemorrhagic) and systemic embolism, and
had nearly half the rate of haemorrhagic stroke events compared to warfarin.
4.4 The Committee considered the results of the company's subgroup analyses,
which used data from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48. It noted that the company presented
data for subgroups based on international normalised ratio (INR) control, that
compared the efficacy of edoxaban and warfarin in relation to the median TTR for
the study centre. One of the analyses showed that the relative benefits of
edoxaban compared with warfarin were greater in centres where the centre-level
TTR was less than 60%. The Committee noted comments from the company and
the Evidence Review Group (ERG) that this was not consistent across all analysis
sets. The Committee concluded that there was insufficient evidence to consider
different treatment effects according to centre-level TTR.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 22 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
4.5 The Committee noted that the company's subgroup analyses for risk of stroke (as
defined by CHADS score) showed that the hazard ratio for edoxaban compared
2
with warfarin was stable and non-inferior across CHADS scores of 2 to 6. The
2
Committee concluded that there was no biologically plausible reason to indicate
that the relative treatment effect would be dependent on the baseline risk of
stroke.
4.6 The Committee discussed the subgroup analysis based on renal function, which
used 3 categories of creatinine clearance (normal renal function, and mild or
moderate impairment). It noted that the results of this analysis suggested a trend
towards decreasing efficacy of edoxaban with increasing creatinine clearance
(see section 3.6). The Committee heard from a clinical expert that this was likely
to be because with better renal function edoxaban is removed by the kidneys
more quickly, leading to a reduction in treatment effect. It also heard that this
may apply to all newer oral anticoagulants, but data need to be re-evaluated to
confirm this. It heard from the clinical experts that the proportion of people with
good renal function (measured by creatinine clearance) who would be eligible for
treatment with edoxaban was in the region of 5% to 10%, and that these are often
younger people. The Committee noted the company's rationale that the results of
this sub-group analysis should be interpreted with caution (see section 3.6). It
also noted the summary of product characteristics which states that, in people
with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and high creatinine clearance, edoxaban should
only be used after careful evaluation of a person's thromboembolic and bleeding
risk. The Committee concluded that if edoxaban is used in accordance with the
summary of product characteristics, there is no reason to make differential
recommendations based on creatinine clearance.
4.7 The Committee considered the adverse events reported in ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48.
It noted that for the primary safety outcome of major bleeding, edoxaban resulted
in statistically significantly fewer bleeds than warfarin. Edoxaban also had
statistically significantly fewer other bleeding events including fatal, intracranial
and clinically relevant non-major bleeds. The Committee recognised the
particular importance of the reduction in intracranial bleeding compared with
warfarin. It also noted the statistically significantly higher numbers of
gastrointestinal bleeds in people treated with edoxaban compared with warfarin.
The Committee was aware that this is not unique to edoxaban, and that clinicians
are now more experienced in using the newer oral anticoagulants and in
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 23 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
managing the adverse events. It also heard from the clinical experts that
administration of 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate has been shown to
reverse the effects of edoxaban. The Committee concluded that the risk–benefit
profile of edoxaban was acceptable.
4.8 The Committee discussed the data for edoxaban compared with rivaroxaban,
apixaban, dabigatran etexilate (110 mg twice daily and 150 mg twice daily) and
rivaroxaban, that were used in the company's network meta-analysis. The
Committee noted that the trials included in the network meta-analysis were not
directly comparable; for example, they had different baseline risks of stroke (with
different CHADS inclusion criteria and mean CHADS scores) and differences in
2 2
time in the therapeutic range in the warfarin groups. The Committee also noted
the ERG's concerns about the violation of the proportional hazards assumption in
data from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48, from the trials of the other 3 newer oral
anticoagulants, and in the warfarin groups of the 4 trials included in the network
meta-analysis. It understood from the ERG that this meant that the hazard ratios
produced by the network meta-analysis were not sufficiently robust to compare
the relative clinical effectiveness of the newer oral anticoagulants. The
Committee considered the results of the network meta-analysis in the light of the
methodological issues and noted that all the newer oral anticoagulants appeared
to have comparable efficacy for the composite primary and bleeding outcomes.
The Committee concluded that the network meta-analysis results should be
interpreted with caution, but edoxaban is unlikely to be different from
rivaroxaban, apixaban and dabigatran etexilate in clinical practice.
Cost effectiveness
4.9 The Committee considered the company's economic model. It noted that the
economic analysis was largely based on the model used in NICE's technology
appraisal guidance on apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in
people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation, which captured the main efficacy and
adverse events of treatment. The Committee agreed that the model structure,
perspective and time horizon were appropriate, although it questioned the
relevance of the inclusion of myocardial infarction. It concluded that the analysis
was consistent with the NICE reference case.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 24 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
4.10 The Committee considered the clinical-effectiveness estimates used in the
company's model. It noted that the comparison of edoxaban with warfarin used
direct evidence from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 to inform the company's economic
model. The Committee was aware of the ERG's concern that the assumption of
proportional hazards for edoxaban and warfarin for haemorrhagic stroke (one of
the components of the primary outcome) appeared to be violated in ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48. However, the Committee considered that the general modelling
approach and the pairwise comparison with warfarin were appropriate. The
Committee noted that for the comparison of edoxaban with the other newer oral
anticoagulants, hazard ratios obtained from the network meta-analysis were used
in the economic model and that these estimates were considered unreliable by
the ERG (see section 4.8). The Committee concluded that data from ENGAGE
AF-TIMI 48 were appropriate for calculating the cost effectiveness of edoxaban
compared with warfarin, but the estimates of the cost effectiveness of edoxaban
compared with dabigatran etexilate, apixaban and rivaroxaban were based on
data that were associated with a high degree of uncertainty.
4.11 The Committee heard from the ERG that there were differences in the utility
values used in the economic model, compared with other NICE technology
appraisals for atrial fibrillation (apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic
embolism in people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation; rivaroxaban for the
prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in people with atrial fibrillation;
dabigatran etexilate for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial
fibrillation). It noted that even though EQ-5D data were collected at baseline in
ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 , the baseline utility value for stable atrial fibrillation used in
the model was from another small UK study. The Committee noted that the ERG
had identified a number of inconsistencies and had raised concerns about some
of the sources of data used in the company model. However, the Committee
noted that when the ERG's suggested revisions (alternative utility estimates for
systemic embolism, myocardial infarction, and transient ischaemic attack) were
applied, together with an amended age-adjusted utility decrement per year of
-0.00646 instead of -0.00029 (see sections 3.40 and 3.41), they had only a minor
impact on the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). The Committee
concluded that the utility values used in the model, although open to debate,
were not key drivers of the cost effectiveness.
4.12 The Committee considered the costs used in the company's model. It noted that
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 25 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
costs for ischaemic stroke, haemorrhagic stroke, and systemic embolism were
based on the Oxford Vascular Study (a cohort study of a UK population) and the
costs were similar to those used in other NICE technology appraisals for atrial
fibrillation (apixaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with
non-valvular atrial fibrillation; rivaroxaban for the prevention of stroke and
systemic embolism in people with atrial fibrillation; dabigatran etexilate for the
prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in atrial fibrillation). The Committee
also noted that an INR monitoring cost of £265 was used by the company, and
that this fell within a range previously accepted in NICE technology appraisals.
The Committee concluded that the costs used in the model were appropriate.
4.13 The Committee considered the cost effectiveness of edoxaban compared with
warfarin. It noted that the company's base-case deterministic and probabilistic
ICERs for edoxaban compared with warfarin were £12,900 and £16,900 per QALY
gained respectively. The Committee noted that the ERG considered the economic
model to be robust to all of the company's sensitivity analyses, and to most of
those done by the ERG. The Committee further considered the ERG's exploratory
analyses. It noted that the change which had the largest single impact on the
ICER was applying the hazard ratio from ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 for haemorrhagic
stroke (which increased the ICER to £17,100 per QALY gained). The Committee
noted that the inclusion of all the ERG's preferred values in the model (see
sections 3.40 and 3.41) resulted in a deterministic ICER of £16,000 per QALY
gained and a probabilistic ICER of £22,100 per QALY gained. The Committee
concluded that taking all of the analyses into account, edoxaban was cost
effective compared with warfarin and could be recommended as an alternative to
warfarin for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular
atrial fibrillation who have 1 or more risk factors for stroke.
4.14 The Committee noted that the cost effectiveness of edoxaban compared with
other newer oral anticoagulants was calculated using hazard ratios from the
network meta-analysis, which the Committee considered to lack robustness (see
section 4.8). In the full incremental analysis edoxaban, dabigatran etexilate
110 mg, apixaban and rivaroxaban were strictly dominated by dabigatran etexilate
150 mg, which had an ICER of £7,645 per additional QALY gained compared to
warfarin. However, there were very small differences in QALYs and costs between
the newer oral anticoagulants. The Committee concluded that there was
insufficient evidence to distinguish between the clinical and cost effectiveness of
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 26 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
edoxaban and the newer oral anticoagulants recommended in previous appraisals
(apixaban, dabigatran etexilate and rivaroxaban). Therefore, edoxaban could be
recommended as a cost-effective treatment for non-valvular atrial fibrillation in
people who have 1 or more risk factors for stroke.
4.15 The Committee concluded that the decision about whether to start treatment
with edoxaban should be made after an informed discussion between the
clinician and the person about the risks and benefits of edoxaban compared with
warfarin, apixaban, dabigatran etexilate and rivaroxaban. For people considering
switching from warfarin to edoxaban, the potential risks and benefits of
edoxaban should be considered in the light of their level of international
normalised ratio (INR) control.
4.16 The Committee was aware of NICE's position statement with regard to the
Pharmaceutical Price Regulation Scheme (PPRS) 2014, and in particular the PPRS
payment mechanism, when appraising edoxaban. It accepted the conclusion 'that
the 2014 PPRS payment mechanism should not, as a matter of course, be
regarded as a relevant consideration in its assessment of the cost effectiveness
of branded medicines'. The Committee heard nothing to suggest that there is any
basis for taking a different view with regard to the relevance of the PPRS to this
appraisal of everolimus. It therefore concluded that the PPRS payment
mechanism was irrelevant for the consideration of the cost effectiveness of
edoxaban.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 27 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has non-valvular atrial fibrillation and the healthcare professional
responsible for their care thinks that edoxaban is the right treatment, it should be
available for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 28 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
6 Appraisal Committee members,
guideline representatives and NICE
project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. Members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. There are 4 Appraisal Committees, each with
a chair and vice-chair. Each Appraisal Committee meets once a month, except in
December when there are no meetings. Each Committee considers its own list of
technologies, and ongoing topics are not moved between Committees.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Dr Jane Adam (Chair)
Consultant Radiologist, Department of Diagnostic Radiology, St George's Hospital, London
Professor Iain Squire (Vice-Chair)
Consultant Physician, University Hospitals of Leicester
Dr Graham Ash
Consultant in General Adult Psychiatry, Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Jeremy Braybrooke
Consultant Medical Oncologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Gerardine Bryant
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 29 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
GP, Swadlincote, Derbyshire
Professor Aileen Clarke
Professor of Public Health and Health Services Research, University of Warwick
Dr Andrew England
Senior Lecturer, Directorate of Radiography, University of Salford
Ms Pamela Rees
Lay Member
Dr Paul Robinson
Medical Director, Merck Sharp & Dohme
Ms Ellen Rule
Director of Transformation and Service Redesign, Gloucestershire Clinical Commissioning
Group
Dr Brian Shine
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
Dr Eldon Spackman
Research Fellow, Centre for Health Economics, University of York
Mr David Thomson
Lay member
Professor Olivia Wu
Professor of Health Technology Assessment, University of Glasgow
Dr Nerys Woolacott
Senior Research Fellow, Centre for Health Economics, University of York
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 30 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Christian Griffiths
Technical Lead
Eleanor Donegan
Technical Adviser
Bijal Joshi
Project Manager
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 31 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
7 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The Evidence Review Group (ERG) report for this appraisal was prepared by Liverpool
Reviews and Implementation Group (LRiG):
• Greenhalgh J, Longworth L, Crossan C, et al., Edoxaban tosylate for preventing stroke
and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial fibrillation: A Single
Technology Appraisal, March 2015.
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal as
consultees and commentators. They were invited to comment on the draft scope.
Companies were also invited to make written submissions. Professional or expert and
patient or carer groups gave their expert views on edoxaban by making a submission to
the Committee. Companies, professional or expert and patient or carer groups, and other
consultees, have the opportunity to appeal against the final appraisal determination.
Company
• Daiichi Sankyo UK (edoxaban)
Professional or expert and patient or carer groups:
• AntiCoagulation Europe (ACE)
• Arrhythmia Alliance
• Association of British Neurologists
• Atrial Fibrillation Association
• British Society for Haematology
• British Thoracic Society
• Clinical Leaders of Thrombosis (CLOT)
• Royal College of Pathologists
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 31 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 32 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
• Royal College of Physicians
• United Kingdom Clinical Pharmacy Association
Other consultees:
• Department of Health
• NHS England
• Welsh Government
Commentator organisations (did not provide written evidence and without the right of
appeal):
• Bayer (rivaroxaban)
• Boehringer Ingelheim (dabigatran etexilate)
• Bristol–Myers Squibb, Pfizer (apixaban)
• Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety for Northern Ireland
• Health Improvement Scotland
• Liverpool Reviews & Implementation Group, University of Liverpool
• National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment Programme
The following individuals were selected from clinical expert and patient expert nominations
from the consultees and commentators. They gave their expert personal view on
edoxaban by providing oral evidence to the Committee.
• Dr Ameet Bakhai, Consultant Cardiologist and Clinical R&D Deputy Director, nominated
by organisation representing Daiichi Sankyo UK – clinical expert
• Miss Nazish Khan, Principal Pharmacist Cardiac Services, nominated by organisation
representing United Kingdom Clinical Pharmacy Association – clinical expert
• Miss Laura Wood, nominated by organisation representing Arrhythmia Alliance –
patient expert
• Miss Vicki Hill, nominated by organisation representing Atrial Fibrillation Association –
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 32 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 33 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
patient expert
Representatives from the following company attended Committee meetings. They
contributed only when asked by the Committee chair to clarify specific issues and
comment on factual accuracy.
• Daiichi Sankyo UK
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 33 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
--- Страница 34 ---
Edoxaban for preventing stroke and systemic embolism in people with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation (TA355)
Update information
July 2021: Section 1.2 updated to include the other anticoagulants approved by NICE.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-1440-1
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 34 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 34
