=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "endovascular-insertion-of-an-intrasaccular-wiremesh-bloodflow-disruption-device-for-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899874170759877.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:22.109643",
  "file_size_bytes": 59425,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/endovascular-insertion-of-an-intrasaccular-wiremesh-bloodflow-disruption-device-for-intracranial-aneurysms-pdf-1899874170759877.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Endovascular insertion of an
intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-
flow disruption device for
intracranial aneurysms
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 14 August 2019
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg658
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 2 ---
Endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for
intracranial aneurysms (IPG658)
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of endovascular insertion of
an intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for intracranial
aneurysms is adequate to support the use of this procedure provided
that standard arrangements are in place for clinical governance, consent
and audit. Find out what standard arrangements mean on the NICE
interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 Patient selection should be done by a multidisciplinary team, except for
in emergency situations, when this may be replaced by a discussion
between an interventional neuroradiologist and neurosurgeon.
1.3 The procedure should only be done in specialised centres with expertise
in the use of this technology and access to neurosurgical facilities.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 An intracranial aneurysm is a bulge in a blood vessel in the brain caused
by a weakness in the blood vessel wall, usually where it branches. Most
brain aneurysms only cause noticeable symptoms if they rupture.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 3 ---
Endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for
intracranial aneurysms (IPG658)
However, large aneurysms may cause local compression symptoms
before they rupture, such as headache. Rupture of intracranial
aneurysms causes subarachnoid haemorrhage and is associated with a
very poor prognosis. About 10% of people die before reaching hospital
and a further 50% die within 4 weeks. About 50% of people who survive
a subarachnoid haemorrhage have a persistent neurological deficit.
2.2 If an intracranial aneurysm is detected before it ruptures, treatment may
be recommended to prevent it rupturing in the future. This is typically
only done if the risk of a rupture is particularly high.
Current treatments
2.3 Current options for managing intracranial aneurysms include coiling,
often with stent placement (stent-assisted coiling), neurosurgical
clipping through a craniotomy (with or without bypass procedures),
parent vessel occlusion (by open neurosurgery or by endovascular
means) and conservative management. Flow diverter embolisation
devices, which are placed in the parent blood vessel to divert blood flow
away from the aneurysm itself, may be an option for some people with
intracranial aneurysms.
The procedure
2.4 Endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-flow
disruption device for intracranial aneurysms is used for the embolisation
of ruptured and unruptured intracranial aneurysms. It may be particularly
suitable for people with wide-necked aneurysms. The procedure is
usually done under general anaesthesia. A catheter is inserted into the
femoral artery and advanced into the cerebral circulation under X-ray
guidance. A second, smaller catheter is put inside the first and is
inserted into the aneurysm. A basket-like device made of fine wire mesh
is then pushed through the second catheter and placed into the
aneurysm sac. The mesh device covers the aneurysm neck and
obstructs blood flow into the aneurysm sac, creating blood stasis and
promoting endothelial growth across the neck of the aneurysm. The
appropriate device size is selected according to the aneurysm width and
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 4 ---
Endovascular insertion of an intrasaccular wire-mesh blood-flow disruption device for
intracranial aneurysms (IPG658)
height.
2.5 The aim is to prevent the aneurysm from rupturing or to stop further
bleeding from an aneurysm that has already ruptured.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 13 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 1 systematic review, 2 non-randomised comparative studies,
9 case series and 1 case report, and is presented in table 2 of the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the
appendix of the overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: device implantation success rate, use of adjuvant
devices, angiographic aneurysm occlusion rates, Modified Rankin Scale
(mRS) score and quality of life.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: intraprocedural rupture of aneurysm, other vascular
damage, thromboembolic complications including device embolisation
and aneurysm rebleeding.
3.4 Eight commentaries from patients who had experience of this procedure
were received, which were discussed by the committee.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3483-6
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
