=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "endoanchoring-systems-in-endovascular-aortic-aneurysm-repair-pdf-1899876161104837.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:19.026311",
  "file_size_bytes": 64868,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/endoanchoring-systems-in-endovascular-aortic-aneurysm-repair-pdf-1899876161104837.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Endoanchoring systems in
endovascular aortic aneurysm
repair
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 25 May 2022
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg725
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 2 ---
Endoanchoring systems in endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (IPG725)
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 For people with unfavourable aneurysm morphology needing an endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) as a primary procedure, or for people with an
existing EVAR who need a secondary procedure, evidence on the safety of using
endoanchoring systems is adequate. Evidence on efficacy is limited in quantity
and quality. Therefore, for these people, this procedure should only be used with
special arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or research. Find
out what special arrangements mean on the NICE interventional procedures
guidance page.
1.2 For people with favourable aneurysm morphology needing an EVAR as a primary
procedure, evidence on the safety of using endoanchoring systems is adequate.
However, evidence on efficacy is inadequate in quantity and quality. Therefore,
for these people, this procedure should only be used in the context of research.
Find out what only in research means on the NICE interventional procedures
guidance page.
1.3 Clinicians wanting to use endoanchoring systems for people with unfavourable
aneurysm morphology needing an EVAR as a primary procedure, or for people
with an existing EVAR who need a secondary procedure should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their healthcare organisation.
• Give patients (and their families and carers as appropriate) clear written
information to support shared decision making, including NICE's information
for the public.
• Ensure that patients (and their families and carers as appropriate) understand
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 3 ---
Endoanchoring systems in endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (IPG725)
the procedure's safety and efficacy, and any uncertainties about these.
• Enter details about everyone having endoanchoring systems in endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair into the National Vascular Registry and review local
clinical outcomes.
• Discuss the outcomes of the procedure during their annual appraisal to
reflect, learn and improve.
1.4 Healthcare organisations should:
• Ensure systems are in place that support clinicians to collect and report data
on outcomes and safety for every patient having this procedure.
• Regularly review data on outcomes and safety for this procedure.
1.5 Patient selection should be done by a multidisciplinary team.
1.6 Further research should report details of patient selection and include longer-
term outcomes.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Aortic aneurysms develop when the wall of the aorta weakens, causing it to
bulge and form a balloon-like expansion. They can happen in the chest (thoracic
aortic aneurysms) or, more commonly, below the diaphragm (abdominal aortic
aneurysms).
Current treatments
2.2 The standard treatment for aortic aneurysm is either open surgical or
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 4 ---
Endoanchoring systems in endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (IPG725)
endovascular repair. During open surgical repair, the aneurysm is opened and a
graft is sewn in above and below the weakened area to allow normal blood flow.
Endovascular repair is a minimally invasive alternative to open repair. A graft is
mounted on a stent, which is inserted into the aorta through catheters placed in
the femoral arteries. The stent–graft is deployed under X-ray guidance and
positioned across the aneurysm.
2.3 In endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) procedures, the stent–graft can
sometimes leak (endoleak) or move out of place (migrate), or a person's anatomy
can make its placement difficult. Type 1 endoleaks happen around the top or
bottom of grafts and are often caused by an inadequate seal.
The procedure
2.4 Endoanchoring systems aim to improve the fixation of the stent–graft used in
EVAR. They may be used prophylactically or therapeutically at the same time as
the primary procedure or during a later, secondary procedure to treat an
endoleak or migration.
2.5 Endoanchoring implants are inserted under general or local anaesthesia. The
implants are deployed through an applier device consisting of a catheter and a
control handle. The catheter is advanced until the distal end contacts the
stent–graft and vessel wall. The number of implants needed depends on the type
of stent–graft and the size of the native vessel. They are placed as evenly as
possible around the circumference of the stent–graft. The catheter is then
removed, the holes in the femoral arteries are sutured and the groin wounds are
closed.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 5 ---
Endoanchoring systems in endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (IPG725)
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 8 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included 2 systematic reviews, 1 non-randomised comparative
study, 2 cohort studies, 1 single-arm study that was also included in the
systematic reviews, a case report, and a case series of reports from the US Food
and Drug Administration Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience
Database. It is presented in the summary of key evidence section in the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of
the overview.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: prevention of aneurysm rupture and prevention of endovascular
aortic aneurysm repair graft migration.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: bleeding, infection and device migration.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee was informed that:
• The risk of migration with endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) is
related to the anatomy of the aorta and the choice of endograft.
• Using endoanchors in a primary EVAR procedure increases the exposure to
X-rays during the procedure.
• Endoanchors are difficult to remove.
• This procedure is primarily intended to be used for people with unfavourable
aneurysm morphology and this is where most of the evidence comes from.
• This procedure is also used for people with favourable aneurysm morphology
who develop an intraoperative complication such as an endoleak during a
primary EVAR. Data collection in this group of people would be helpful.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 6 ---
Endoanchoring systems in endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (IPG725)
ISBN: 978-1-4731-4595-5
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
