=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "endoscopic-saphenous-vein-harvest-for-coronary-artery-bypass-grafting-pdf-1899870052341445.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:22.670458",
  "file_size_bytes": 73284,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/endoscopic-saphenous-vein-harvest-for-coronary-artery-bypass-grafting-pdf-1899870052341445.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Endoscopic saphenous vein
harvest for coronary artery
bypass grafting
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 25 June 2014
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg494
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG343.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Current evidence on the efficacy and safety of endoscopic saphenous vein
harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is adequate to support the
use of this procedure provided that normal arrangements are in place for clinical
governance, consent and audit.
1.2 The National Institute for Cardiovascular Outcomes Research runs the UK Central
Cardiac Audit Database (UKCCAD) and clinicians should enter details of all
patients undergoing endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for CABG onto this
database.
2 Indications and current treatments
2.1 Coronary artery disease refers to hardening and narrowing of the coronary
arteries as a result of atherosclerosis. This can cause angina and myocardial
infarction, and result in heart failure. One treatment option for coronary artery
disease is coronary artery bypass grafting, which is normally done using
autologous vein or arterial grafts. Vein grafts are most commonly done using the
great saphenous vein.
2.2 The conventional method of harvesting the saphenous vein is an 'open' technique

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
using 1 or more incisions in the leg. This technique may result in local
complications including wound infection, dehiscence and persistent pain.
Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest aims to reduce these problems by using
much smaller incisions.
3 The procedure
3.1 The procedure is carried out with the patient under general anaesthesia, at the
same time as coronary artery bypass grafting. An endoscope is usually inserted
through a short incision near the knee, to visualise the subcutaneous plane in
which the great saphenous vein lies. Carbon dioxide insufflation may be used to
open this space. The vein is mobilised by blunt dissection and its tributaries are
clipped and divided before removing the dissected segment of vein. The
subcutaneous tunnel may be packed with an antibiotic-soaked swab, which is
removed before wound closure. A compression bandage is applied to the leg to
minimise haematoma.
4 Efficacy
This section describes efficacy outcomes from the published literature that the Committee
considered as part of the evidence about this procedure. For more detailed information on
the evidence, see the overview.
4.1 A systematic review and meta-analysis of 44 studies including 269,474 patients
reported no statistically significant difference in mid-term mortality between
patients treated by endoscopic or open saphenous vein harvest for coronary
artery bypass grafting (CABG; log-relative risk 0.90, 95% confidence interval [CI]
0.79 to 1.03, p=0.12, median follow-up 22.5 months). A non-randomised
comparative study of 4,709 patients treated by endoscopic or open saphenous
vein harvest reported that there was no difference between the groups for the
main outcome measure of mid-term mortality, repeat revascularisation and
myocardial infarction combined (hazard ratio [HR] 1.15, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.74,
p=0.51) in 2,665 propensity-matched patients (533 versus 2,132). A non-
randomised comparative study of 1,988 patients treated by endoscopic or open

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
saphenous vein harvest reported overall rates of revascularisation, death and
myocardial infarction of 6% and 7% respectively (p=0.18) with a mean follow-up of
22 months.
4.2 The systematic review of 44 studies reported an increased incidence of vein
graft stenosis in the endoscopic group compared with the open group (3 studies,
n=3,229, log-rate ratio 1.19, 95% CI 1.05 to 1.34, p=0.005). In 2 of the studies
reporting this outcome, angiography was done at 3 and 6 months; in the third
study, angiograms were done at a median of 12.6 months. Neither of the
randomised controlled trials included in this analysis showed any statistically
significant difference between the groups.
4.3 The systematic review of 44 studies reported less postoperative pain in patients
following endoscopic saphenous vein harvesting than after open saphenous vein
harvest (12 studies, n=663, unstandardised mean difference -1.48, 95% CI -2.38
to -0.59, p=0.001, I2=98% [significant heterogeneity]). A similar result was
obtained when the analysis was limited to randomised controlled trials only
(unstandardised mean difference -1.75, 95% CI -3.17 to -0.32, p=0.02). Significant
heterogeneity was observed in both analyses, partly because of differences in
the device system used across studies.
4.4 The specialist advisers listed key efficacy outcomes as reduced hospital stay,
reduced risk of leg wound infections, early mobility, early rehabilitation and return
to normal activities after CABG, reduced rate of readmissions, freedom from
myocardial infarction, freedom from re-intervention, and patient satisfaction.
5 Safety
This section describes safety outcomes from the published literature that the Committee
considered as part of the evidence about this procedure. For more detailed information on
the evidence, see the overview.
5.1 The systematic review and meta-analysis of 44 studies reported a lower
incidence of 30-day mortality in patients treated by endoscopic saphenous vein
harvest than in patients who had open saphenous vein harvest (log-relative risk
0.71, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.56 to 0.90, p=0.005). This difference was no

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
longer statistically significant when only randomised controlled trials were
analysed (log-relative risk 0.75, 95% CI 0.27 to 2.11, p=0.58). In-hospital mortality
was 1% after both endoscopic and open saphenous vein harvest in the non-
randomised comparative study of 4,709 patients (2,665 propensity-matched
patients [533 versus 2,132]). Mortality within 30 days occurred in 2% of patients
treated by endoscopic saphenous vein harvest and 4% of patients treated by
open saphenous vein harvest in the non-randomised comparative study of
1,988 patients (478 propensity-matched patients, p=0.26).
5.2 Wound infection was reported in a lower proportion of patients treated by
endovascular vein harvest than in patients treated by open saphenous vein
harvest in the systematic review of 44 studies (log-relative risk 0.31, 95% CI 0.23
to 0.42, p<0.0001, I2=43%). A similar result was reported from the analysis of
randomised controlled trials only (log-relative risk 0.26, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.44,
p<0.0001). Wound infection was reported in less than 1% of patients treated by
endoscopic saphenous vein harvest and 2% of patients treated by open
saphenous vein harvest in the non-randomised comparative study of
1,988 patients (p=0.03).
5.3 Severe leg wound complications needing surgical revision were reported in 1%
and 2% of patients treated by endoscopic and open saphenous vein harvest
respectively (p=not significant) in the non-randomised comparative study of
885 patients.
5.4 Necrotising fasciitis was reported in 1 patient in a case report. The patient
developed symptoms 3 weeks after the procedure, and surgical exploration of
the wound showed extensive necrosis. Treatment included radical debridement,
intravenous antibiotics followed by oral antibiotics, and a split-thickness skin
graft.
5.5 Compartment syndrome was reported in 1 patient in a case report. Symptoms of
leg tightness, swelling and tenderness occurred 4 days after the procedure. A
fasciotomy was performed to decompress all 4 compartments of the lower leg.
By 3 months, the patient had recovered without any neurological sequelae.
5.6 Massive carbon dioxide (CO ) embolisation was reported in 2 patients in a case
2
series of 405 patients: 1 patient was successfully treated pharmacologically and

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
the other needed emergency cardiopulmonary bypass support to complete the
coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
5.7 A case report described scrotal distension due to CO and signs of cellulitis in
2
1 patient following endoscopic saphenous vein harvesting. The patient was
treated with antibiotics and discharged after 14 days.
5.8 Pneumoperitoneum was reported in 1 patient in a case report. Postoperative
chest X-ray showed a complete resorption of CO .
2
5.9 The specialist advisers described the possibility that endoscopic saphenous vein
harvest might result in damage to the vein, which could decrease patency and
lead to increased rates of postoperative myocardial infarction, mid-term
myocardial infarction, mid-term mortality, recurrence of angina, repeat
revascularisation rates and decreased survival over the long term.
6 Committee comments
6.1 When it considered endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery
bypass grafting in 2010 (see section 7), the Committee had concerns about
safety in the short and medium term. These concerns were related to the
possible reduction in patency rates of endoscopically harvested vein grafts, with
increased risks of re-intervention, myocardial infarction and death compared
against open harvesting techniques. Evidence published since that time included
large numbers of patients, and the Committee judged that it did not show
increased occlusion rates or incidences of re-intervention, myocardial infarction
or death for endoscopically harvested grafts.
6.2 The Committee noted the importance of training and regular experience for any
clinician doing this procedure.
6.3 The Committee noted positive comments from patients about their experiences
of the procedure.

Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest for coronary artery bypass grafting (IPG494)
7 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN 978-1-4731-0617-8
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
