=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ESC Patient Guidelines CVD in patients with diabetes.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:37.098479",
  "file_size_bytes": 889656,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/ESC Patient Guidelines CVD in patients with diabetes.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
Management of
Cardiovascular Disease in
Patients with Diabetes:
What Patients
Need to Know
Image is for illustrative purposes only
--- Страница 2 ---
What Are Clinical Practice Guidelines?
Clinical Practice Guidelines are written by a team of healthcare professionals and scientists, and are
mainly intended for healthcare professionals. They provide diagnosis and treatment recommendations
based on medical and scientific evidence to ensure that patients receive appropriate care.
This document is for patients, their families and caregivers, and is based on the longer European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of cardiovascular disease
in patients with diabetes.
What Will This Document Tell Me?
Patients with diabetes are at higher risk of developing cardiovascular disease and having
cardiovascular events, such as heart attacks, than patients without diabetes.
This guide provides an overview of the latest evidence-based recommendations related to
cardiovascular disease and diabetes. In particular, it should help you to understand:
• The different diseases that increase the risk of cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes
• The treatments that are recommended to reduce cardiovascular risk
• The lifestyle modifications that can help reduce cardiovascular risk
If you want to know more about any of the topics in this document, there are links to the appropriate sections
in the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes.
If you would like more general information about keeping your heart healthy, you can visit: healthy-heart.org/
How Will This Document Help Me?
This document is intended to answer some questions that you may have and support you in
conversations with your medical team. For example, we hope this document will give you knowledge and
confidence when discussing treatments so you can share in the decision-making process.
If you are a healthcare professional, the ESC hopes that this document, translated into the language
of your patients, will provide them and their caregivers with an understanding of the high risk of
cardiovascular disease with diabetes and how this can be managed. Please share it widely with your
patients and colleagues.
--- Страница 3 ---
The Risk Of Cardiovascular Events
Is High With Diabetes
Patients with diabetes have a higher risk of developing cardiovascular diseases, such as atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease and heart failure, compared with patients who do not have diabetes. In addition,
patients with diabetes may develop severe damage to other organs such as the kidneys (chronic kidney
disease) and this also increases the risk of cardiovascular events.
In patients with diabetes, detecting heart and kidney diseases is of critical importance to ensure that the
most appropriate treatments and support are given to improve prognosis.
Diagnosis Of Cardiovascular
Diseases And Diabetes
Based on the ESC Guidelines, all patients with diabetes should be checked for the symptoms or signs
of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, for heart failure and for chronic kidney disease. Similarly, all
patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease should have a test to see if they have diabetes.
If you do not know already, you should ask your doctor or healthcare provider to assess your
cardiovascular risk:
If you have diabetes, you should know if you have atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or heart failure
• Your healthcare provider can check for symptoms or signs of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease and heart failure
If you have diabetes, you should know if you have chronic kidney disease
• Your healthcare provider can check if your kidneys are working properly (measured by estimated
glomerular filtration rate) and if there is any damage (measured by urine albumin/creatine ratio)
If you have atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, you should know if you have diabetes
• Your healthcare provider can check for diabetes e.g. using a blood test for fasting plasma
glucose and HbA1c
If you have type 2 diabetes and no atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or kidney disease, you
should know if you are at high risk of these diseases in the future
• Your healthcare provider can check your 10-year cardiovascular risk using a scoring system called
SCORE2-Diabetes. You may be given treatments to reduce levels of glucose and/or cholesterol
depending on your estimated risk.
I have diabetes, I have diabetes,
have I got have I got heart
atherosclerotic CVD? failure?
I have diabetes, I have diabetes, I have atherosclerotic
I have heart failure,
have I got chronic what is my 10-year CVD, have I got
have I got diabetes?
kidney disease? cardiovascular risk? diabetes?
--- Страница 4 ---
Medications To Lower
Cardiovascular Risk
The ESC Guidelines recommend certain heart-protective medications based on whether you have
diabetes, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart failure and/or chronic kidney disease. These
medications are added to your existing treatments, regardless of your glucose control or glucose-
lowering therapies given for diabetes.
If you have type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, it is recommended that
you receive both a GLP-1 RA and an SGLT2 inhibitor with proven cardiovascular benefit to reduce
cardiovascular risk
If you have type 2 diabetes and heart failure, it is recommended that you receive an SGLT2 inhibitor
with proven cardiovascular benefit to reduce hospital stays due to worsening heart failure
• You should receive an SGLT2 inhibitor regardless of the type of heart failure that you have
If you have type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease, it is recommended that you receive an
SGLT2 inhibitor to reduce the cardiovascular and kidney failure risk
• To further reduce the risk, finerenone is also recommended if you have chronic kidney disease
I have diabetes, have I got I have diabetes, have I
atherosclerotic CVD? got heart failure?
I have diabetes, have I got
I have atherosclerotic CVD, I have heart failure, have I
chronic kidney disease?
have I got diabetes? got diabetes?
Yes Yes Yes
Type 2 diabetes and Type 2 diabetes and
Type 2 diabetes and
atherosclerotic CVD = chronic kidney disease
heart failure =
GLP-1 RA and an = SGLT2 inhibitor plus
SGLT2 inhibitor
SGLT2 inhibitor finerenone
GLP-1 RA = glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist
SGLT2 inhibitor = sodium–glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitor
These treatments are added to your existing medication and are not related to glucose control.
SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 RAs and finerenone are not approved for patients with type 1 diabetes. The
guidelines mention that this is an important knowledge gap since patients with type 1 diabetes need to
know if these medications can help them too.
--- Страница 5 ---
Central Illustration
Cardiovascular disease Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Presentation
Pancreas
The disease the Heart Artery
patient has already
Type 2 diabetes Cardiovascular disease Chronic kidney disease
Evaluation
Confirmed Confirmed Confirmed
The diseases the
doctor checks for
Cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes
Diagnosis Type 2 diabetes and Type 2 diabetes and
and atherosclerotic
The confirmed heart failure chronic kidney disease
cardiovascular disease
diseases
SGLT2 SGLT2
GLP-1 RA SGLT2 inhibitor Finerenone
inhibitor inhibitor
Treatment
The medication
the patient
All medications are added to existing treatments and are not related to glucose control
should receive
--- Страница 6 ---
Therapeutic Lifestyle Modification
The ESC Guidelines recommend lifestyle changes as another type of therapy to reduce cardiovascular
risk in patients with diabetes including:
• Weight control – reduction in weight is recommended when necessary
• Increasing physical activity and exercise – any increase in steps per day will help your physical
and mental wellbeing
• Smoking cessation – stopping smoking is a key way to reduce cardiovascular risk in all people
• Controlling cardiovascular risk factors – lowering high levels of blood pressure and cholesterol is
recommended in patients with or without diabetes
Making lifestyle changes should not delay starting recommended medications.
Other Important Information
Some parts of the management of cardiovascular diseases are similar in patients with type 1 diabetes or
type 2 diabetes and in patients without diabetes.
Your doctor or healthcare provider should regularly check for an abnormal heart rhythm, such as atrial
fibrillation, by taking your pulse or doing an “ECG” to measure the electrical activity of the heart.
Your doctor or healthcare provider should also regularly check if there are any problems with the blood
supply to your legs (your “ankle-brachial index”) to see if you have lower-extremity artery disease.
Remember, if you have any questions, you can ask your doctor or healthcare provider.
Effective communication with your doctor or healthcare provider helps you to receive “person-
centred care” – this means working together to get the right recommended treatments and the right
support for you as an individual to reduce your cardiovascular risk, improve your prognosis and
improve your quality of life.
Frequent follow-up
Face-to-face meetings Telemedicine
Person-centred care
Persons with diabetes Interdisciplinary
team
Family/caregivers
Physicians, nurses,
Cultural, gender,
dietologists,
physical, psychological,
psychologists,
socio-economic,
physiotherapists, etc
spiritual perspectives
Communication, relationship development,
education, empowerment, support, holistic,
comprehensive & problem-solving,
self-management
--- Страница 7 ---
This guide for patients is a simplified version of the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
management of cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes. The full guidelines are
available in English on the ESC website (escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines/
CVD-and-Diabetes-Guidelines); your healthcare provider will be familiar with its content and
recommendations. Online translator tools may be able to translate the text and present it in an
alternative language, with limitations.
Authors
• Carolyn Crawford (United Kingdom), ESC Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France
• Tiny Jaarsma, Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
• Ekaterini Lambrinou, Department of Nursing, Cyprus University of Technology, Limassol, Cyprus
• Nikolaus Marx, Department of Internal Medicine I, Cardiology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
• Dirk Müller-Wieland, Department of Internal Medicine I Cardiology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
• Katharina Schütt, Department of Internal Medicine I Cardiology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
Disclaimer
This material was adapted from the ESC Guidelines for the management of cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes
(European Heart Journal 2023 - doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehad192) as published on 25 August 2023.
Copyright © European Society of Cardiology 2023 - All Rights Reserved.
This material has been published for personal and educational use only. No commercial use is authorised. No part of this document
may be translated or reproduced in any form without written permission from the ESC. Permission can be obtained upon submission
of a written request to ESC, Practice Guidelines Department, Les Templiers - 2035, Route des Colles - CS 80179 Biot - 06903 Sophia
Antipolis Cedex - France. Email: guidelines@escardio.org
This material was adapted from the ESC Guidelines as an aid to patients and carers. It represents the views of the ESC and was
produced after careful consideration of the scientific and medical knowledge and the evidence available at the time of their
publication. The ESC is not responsible in the event of any contradiction, discrepancy and/or ambiguity between the ESC Guidelines
and any other official recommendations or guidelines issued by the relevant public health authorities, in particular in relation to good
use of healthcare or therapeutic strategies. Please refer to the preamble of the original guidelines for further details of the role of
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the individual responsibility of health professionals when making decisions for the care of patients.
