=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ESC Patient Guidelines Cardio Oncology - final.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:47.466215",
  "file_size_bytes": 1212925,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/ESC Patient Guidelines Cardio Oncology - final.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines on
Cardio-Oncology:
What Patients
Need to Know
Image is for illustrative purposes only

What Are Clinical Practice Guidelines?
Clinical Practice Guidelines are written by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare
professionals, including doctors, nurses, scientists and patients, and are intended
mainly for use in clinics and hospitals. Guidelines are useful in making diagnoses and
deciding on treatment using the most up-to-date medical and scientific evidence to
ensure that patients receive the most appropriate care.
This document is for patients with cancer, their families and caregivers, and is based on
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Clinical Practice Guidelines on cardio-oncology.
What Will This Document Tell Me?
Some cancer treatments may harm the heart and circulation. This document provides
an overview of the latest recommendations on how these side effects can be prevented,
diagnosed and treated. It should help you to understand the importance of:
• Being treated by a multidisciplinary cardio-oncology team, which means having a
team of doctors, nurses and other healthcare professionals involved in your care
• Looking after your heart health, during and after cancer treatment
• Paying particular attention to your heart health if you have previously had a heart
attack, a stroke, an arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) or you have high blood pressure,
diabetes or high cholesterol
• Making appropriate healthy lifestyle choices
If you want to know more about any of the topics in this document, there are links to the
appropriate sections in the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines on cardio-oncology.
How Will This Document Help Me?
This document is intended to answer some questions that you may have and support
you in conversations with your medical team. For example, we hope this document will
give you knowledge and confidence when discussing treatments so you can share in the
decision-making process with your doctors. The document also provides information on
ways you can look after your own heart health during treatment.
If you are a healthcare professional, the ESC hopes that this document, translated into
the language of your patients, will provide them and their families and caregivers with
an overview of how cardio-oncology strategies can help them in terms of treatment and
management. Please share it widely with your patients and colleagues.

Cancer and Heart Complications:
What is Cardio-Oncology?
There are many different types of cancer therapies including surgery, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy as well as medications such as hormonal treatments, targeted therapies and
immunotherapy. Some of these therapies may increase the risk of heart or circulatory
problems – we call these complications “cardiotoxicity” or “cardiovascular toxicity.”
The types of complications can include:
• High blood pressure
• A heart attack or chest pain, called “angina”
• Heart muscle weakness that can develop into heart failure when the heart does not
pump properly
• The heart becoming inflamed, known as myocarditis
• An irregular heartbeat called an arrhythmia
• A blood clot forming in a vein (called “deep vein thrombosis”) or in the lungs
(called “pulmonary embolism”)
Sometimes, cardiotoxicity can limit the use of effective anticancer therapies. It is
important to emphasise that these anticancer therapies have been shown to be effective
in treating cancer and the fear of possible cardiotoxicity should not prevent you
from receiving the best treatment for your cancer. It is also important to remember
that cardiotoxicity does not occur in everyone receiving these treatments. Most cancer
patients receive their cancer treatment without cardiovascular complications.
The aims of cardio-oncology are to allow patients with cancer to receive the best
possible cancer treatment and to maintain a healthy heart.
To help with this, ESC Guidelines recommend that:
• Patients who are scheduled to receive cancer treatment should be assessed for their
potential risk of heart complications
• Patients should be closely monitored, during and after treatment, so any side effects
can be minimised

Healthcare Professionals and Patients
with Cancer – Working in Partnership
A partnership with your medical team is important to ensure you receive the most
effective care. Your medical team will give you relevant information on your specific cancer
treatment – they will discuss the benefits with you and let you know if there are any side
effects related to the heart and circulation. They will monitor you for heart problems and
discuss what heart symptoms to look out for and how to keep your heart healthy.
Discuss the risk of cardiotoxicity
based on the cancer treatment
and your heart health
Report any heart
symptoms to your
Monitor for any medical team
signs of heart
problems
Remember to take any
heart drugs prescribed
Discuss heart
symptoms to Discuss healthy
look out for lifestyle choices
If you feel any unusual heart symptoms during or after your cancer treatment, it is
essential that you contact your medical team immediately to be assessed and receive
treatment to reduce the risk of cancer treatment interruption.
What Can I Expect?
You will discuss the various cancer therapy options with your oncologist and once the
treatment has been selected, the cancer team will work with the heart team to decide if
you need tests on your heart and circulation.
• If there is no or minimal risk of your cancer treatment causing heart problems, you
will not require any heart tests.
• If your cancer treatment has the potential to cause cardiotoxicity, the ESC Guidelines
provide your medical team with information on how to assess your risk, what tests
are needed to monitor your heart health and if a referral to a cardiologist (a heart
doctor) is needed.

• If you need to have heart tests, these may be carried out before you start treatment
(called “baseline” tests) to assess your risk and also to see if there are any changes
during treatment.
• Heart tests may include heart rhythm tracing (called an “ECG” or “electrocardiogram”),
blood tests and/or a heart scan using ultrasound (“echocardiography”), an MRI scanner
or a CT scanner. These will help cardiologists to assess your heart health and to work
out if you have any existing heart problems. In the case of abnormal findings, heart
treatments may be started.
Heart tests that help to assess cardiotoxicity risk
Electrocardiogram (ECG) Blood tests can check Echocardiogram (echo)
checks the electrical if the heart is damaged is an ultrasound of the
activity of the heart (e.g. BNP/NT-proBNP heart that shows how well
and troponin) it is working
Cardiac magnetic resonance Cardiac computed tomography
checks the function and provides a detailed picture of
structure of the heart your heart and blood vessels
• If your cancer treatment has the potential to cause cardiotoxicity and you are
considered at low risk, then you may just need one or two tests during treatment and
one follow-up heart check in the first year after completing your treatment.
• If your cancer treatment has the potential to cause cardiotoxicity and you are
considered at moderate risk, then you will need closer monitoring of your heart
health with more frequent tests during and after treatment.
• If your cancer treatment has the potential to cause cardiotoxicity and you are
considered at high risk then you will need to see a cardiologist before starting
treatment, and you may require heart medication (called “cardio-protection”) during
your cancer therapy. The ESC Guidelines provide information to your oncologist/
haematologist and your cardiologist on which heart medication to consider and which
tests to carry out during cancer treatment and in the first year after treatment.

Commonly Asked Questions Before
Cancer Treatment
Remember, you can ask your medical team if there is anything you would like to discuss,
but here are some common questions that patients with cancer may have:
Am I at risk for developing cardiovascular toxicity
during cancer therapy?
The risk for developing cardiovascular toxicity depends on three main factors:
• Your heart health before cancer treatment starts
You may have a healthy heart or you may have a heart problem already. The ESC
Guidelines provide risk assessment tools that your medical team will use to understand
your risk of cardiotoxicity before you start cancer treatment.
• The heart risk of the cancer treatment you are going to receive
Treatments for cancer work differently and have varying risks for causing
cardiotoxicity. The cancer team will discuss these risks with you and decide which
treatment is most appropriate.
• How your heart health changes while you receive cancer treatment
It is important that any signs of cardiotoxicity are found early to reduce the chances
of them developing into serious complications. If you are at risk, a personal monitoring
plan will be put together so any signs can be detected quickly.

How can my doctor and I assess my risk of
developing cardiotoxicity?
The ESC Guidelines describe the factors that increase the risk of cardiotoxicity of
cancer treatments. These include a person’s age, whether they have had previous
cancer therapies, their cardiovascular risk factors (such as blood pressure) and lifestyle
(including diet and exercise).
The ESC Guidelines contain risk assessment tools, which will help your oncologist or
haematologist determine your risk level. By asking you certain questions about your
medical history and carrying out baseline tests, your medical team can determine your
risk profile and develop a treatment plan specifically for you.
Common examples of cardiotoxicity risk factors
Age, sex,
genetics
Previous
Cardiovascular
cardiovascular
risk factors
disease
Cardiotoxicity
Previous
Lifestyle risk
cardiotoxic cancer
factors
therapies
Abnormalities in
electrocardiograms,
echocardiograms and
blood tests

What can I do to stay healthy and well?
A healthy lifestyle can reduce your risk of developing a heart or circulation problem
when you start taking your cancer therapy and improve your quality of life.
• A healthy diet means eating more fruit and vegetables, reducing the number of
processed foods and take-aways, and avoiding high fat and high sugar foods. You can
find advice on a healthy diet on the ESC’s Healthy-Heart.org website.
• If you are overweight, ask your cancer team how you can lose weight safety after
cancer treatment. In general, weight loss is not recommended during cancer
treatment, but it is critical that you eat healthily.
• Try to stay active with regular physical activity if you can. If you feel able, you
should aim for 90 to 150 minutes per week – this might involve going for a brisk
30- to 40-minute walk 3 or 4 times a week.
• Stop smoking and limit any alcohol consumption.
Any positive lifestyle changes you make will benefit your health in the long term so
keep them up!
The ESC Guidelines provide your cancer and cardiology doctors with the information
needed to create an individualised plan for your treatment and to protect your heart.
You will need to make sure you continue to take any prescribed heart medication
for as long as the medical team tell you. This is called “treatment adherence” and is
very important to ensure that the medicines work well. The plan will also be useful to
continue after your cancer treatment has finished to maintain better health.

I already have a heart problem – is it safe for me to
receive cancer therapy?
We know there is a greater risk of developing cardiotoxicity for patients who already
have a heart condition. However, pre-existing heart problems usually do not prevent
you from receiving the best possible treatment for your cancer.
Discuss your heart condition with your cancer team. Healthcare professionals who
specialise in both cancer and heart problems will provide advice. If you are already
taking tablets for high blood pressure or for a heart condition, it is important that
you do NOT stop taking them without speaking to your doctor. Also, tell your medical
team if you have a pacemaker or a cardiac defibrillator so they can assess appropriate
monitoring strategies during radiotherapy.
As part of the shared decision-making, your cancer team will discuss the risks and
benefits of the proposed cancer treatment before you start treatment. They will
develop an individualised treatment plan for your heart health that will be carried out
during and after your cancer treatment.

Cardio-Oncology Care During Cancer
Therapy
What heart symptoms should I look out for during
cancer treatment?
Chest pain Shortness of breath Leg swelling
(in one or both legs)
Feeling faint or dizzy Increased tiredness Fast or racing heartbeat
(more than usual) called “palpitations”
If you experience any of these symptoms, please contact your doctor straight away,
so that you can be assessed and follow-up appointments can be made. Not all heart
problems that occur during cancer therapy are related to your cancer therapy and
other potential causes may need to be investigated.
If baseline tests were done before your cancer treatment, cardiologists will be able to
compare your test results over time to see if there have been any changes.
If you develop a heart or circulation condition during your cancer treatment, doctors
will decide if the best option is to keep going with your current treatment, stop it
temporarily or change to a different treatment.
The ESC Guidelines provide structured plans for how your oncologist and cardiologist
can look after you in this situation. They will discuss this with you and a shared decision
will be made together.

Cardio-Oncology Care After Cancer
Treatment
In some people, cancer treatment (including cancer drugs and/or radiation therapy) may
affect their heart and circulation months to years after completing therapy, for example,
developing high blood pressure, heart muscle weakness, coronary artery disease, heart
rhythm disturbances (arrhythmias) or problems with the valves in your heart.
Your family doctor will be the main point of contact after cancer treatment has been
completed and the cancer team will organise follow-ups as required – this may be from
every few months to one follow-up appointment a year.

Who is at risk of cardiotoxicity after cancer
treatment has finished?
The risk of long-term effects depends on several factors. People most at risk include
those with existing heart-related risk factors (e.g. high blood pressure or diabetes)
or existing heart conditions. The type of cancer treatment received also matters, for
example, risk is increased with anthracycline chemotherapy, such as doxorubicin,
epirubicin, daunorubicin and idarubicin, with chest radiation, and with long-term
hormonal treatments, such as those for prostate cancer. Long-term effects may be
more likely if you developed a new heart problem during treatment, but this depends
on how mild or serious that heart problem is, and whether it required heart medication.
Other factors such as lifestyle and environment are also important and any lifestyle-
related changes you make will help reduce the risk.
What can I do to reduce the risk of late effects?
You can reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease by:
• Making healthy lifestyle choices (diet, exercise, weight control, smoking cessation)
• Working with your medical team to manage your cardiovascular risk factors
(high blood pressure, diabetes and cholesterol levels)
• Monitoring your blood pressure at home
• Taking your prescribed medication (e.g. for high blood pressure)
The ESC Guidelines recommend that all cancer patients who have received a cancer
treatment with the potential to cause cardiotoxicity have regular cardiac check-ups
after cancer treatment – it is very important that you attend these appointments.
The type and duration of monitoring will depend on your risk. Your medical team will
determine if you are at low, moderate or high/very high risk of cardiovascular disease
and you will be invited for follow-up visits at the recommended frequency suggested
in the ESC Guidelines. In between follow-up visits, it is essential that you notify your
doctors of any new heart-related symptoms.

Long-term surveillance in asymptomatic
cancer survivors
How does this affect me as an adult survivor of
childhood and adolescent cancer?
Advances in the treatment of childhood and adolescent cancers have led to significant
improvements in survival. However, cardiovascular disease can occur years after
treatment for childhood cancer, so it is important that you have regular follow-up with
your medical team to manage your cardiovascular risk factors. For some individuals,
the ESC Guidelines recommend an echocardiogram (heart ultrasound) every 2-5 years,
depending on your risk level.

How does this affect me as a woman of
child-bearing age?
If you are female and you had cancer as a child, adolescent, or young adult, and if you
were treated with anthracycline chemotherapy and/or chest radiation, you may be at
higher risk of developing heart problems as an adult. The ESC Guidelines recommend
that you should have an assessment of your cardiovascular health by a cardiologist
prior to or early in your pregnancy.
Summary
In summary, your cancer team will work closely with the heart team, before your
treatment, to ensure you receive the best possible cancer treatment while minimising
any risk to your heart and circulation.
Monitoring will take place during treatment and once treatment is completed, if needed,
to detect any heart side effects early.
You can look after your own heart health by notifying your medical team if you experience
any heart symptoms and also by making healthy lifestyle choices. And don’t forget,
if you have any questions, do ask!

Definitions
Cardiac biomarkers are substances that are released into the blood when the heart is
damaged or stressed.
Cardiac computed tomography uses X-rays to create detailed pictures of your heart
and blood vessels.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging uses magnetic waves to create detailed pictures
and videos showing the structure and the function of the heart.
Chemotherapy is drugs that target cancer growth, either by killing the cells or by
stopping or slowing them from growing and dividing.
Echocardiography is an imaging technique that uses ultrasound (sounds at a very high
frequency) to show the structure and the function of the heart and how well your heart
is working.
Electrocardiography looks at the electrical activity of the heart to help study the
heart’s rhythm.
Hormone therapy inhibits the growth of certain cancer cells that are stimulated by
hormones produced by the patient (i.e. some breast cancers are driven by oestrogen
and prostate cancers are usually driven by testosterone).
Immunotherapy aims to stimulate the body’s own immune system to destroy cancer
cells. There are different types of cancer immunotherapy, but a common type is called
“checkpoint inhibitors.”
Radiotherapy uses high-energy radiation to damage cancer cells and destroy them.
Targeted therapies block specific signals that tell cancer cells to grow, divide and spread.

This guide for patients is a simplified version of the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines
on cardio-oncology. The full guidelines are available in English on the ESC website
(www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines/Cardio-oncology-
guidelines); your healthcare provider will be familiar with its content and
recommendations. Online translator tools may be able to translate the text and
present it in an alternative language, with limitations.
Authors
• Riccardo Asteggiano, Cardiology, LARC (Laboratorio Analisi Ricerca Clinica), Turin, Italy, and School of Medicine, Insubria University,
Varese, Italy
• Susan F. Dent, Department of Medicine, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States of America
• Dimitrios Farmakis, Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
• Tiny Jaarsma, Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
• Gerry Lee, Division of Applied Technology for Clinical Care, Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery & Palliative Care,
King’s College London, United Kingdom
• Teresa López-Fernández, Cardiology Department, La Paz University Hospital, IdiPAZ Research Institute, Madrid, Spain
• Alexander R. Lyon, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London and Cardio-Oncology Service, Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, United Kingdom
• Richard Stephens (United Kingdom), ESC Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France
• Sebastian Szmit, Department of Pulmonary Circulation, Thromboembolic Diseases and Cardiology, Centre of Postgraduate Medical
Education, Otwock, Poland, and Institute of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland
• Paaladinesh Thavendiranathan, Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Ted Rogers Program in Cardiotoxicity Prevention,
Peter Munk Cardiac Center, Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Disclaimer
This material was adapted from the ESC Guidelines on cardio-oncology (European Heart Journal 2022 - doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehac244) as published on 26 August 2022.
Copyright © European Society of Cardiology 2022 - All Rights Reserved.
This material has been published for personal and educational use only. No commercial use is authorised. No part of this document
may be translated or reproduced in any form without written permission from the ESC. Permission can be obtained upon submission
of a written request to ESC, Practice Guidelines Department, Les Templiers - 2035, Route des Colles - CS 80179 Biot - 06903 Sophia
Antipolis Cedex - France. Email: guidelines@escardio.org
This material was adapted from the ESC Guidelines as an aid to patients and carers. It represents the views of the ESC and was
produced after careful consideration of the scientific and medical knowledge and the evidence available at the time of their
publication. The ESC is not responsible in the event of any contradiction, discrepancy and/or ambiguity between the ESC Guidelines
and any other official recommendations or guidelines issued by the relevant public health authorities, in particular in relation to good
use of healthcare or therapeutic strategies. Please refer to the preamble of the original guidelines for further details of the role of
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the individual responsibility of health professionals when making decisions for the care of patients.
