=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ESC-cvd-and-mental-health-patient-guidelines.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:20.561306",
  "file_size_bytes": 1052916,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/ESC-cvd-and-mental-health-patient-guidelines.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

ESC Clinical Consensus Statement on
Mental Health and
Cardiovascular Disease:
What Patients
Need to Know
Image is for illustrative purposes only

What is a Clinical Consensus Statement?
Clinical Consensus Statements are documents created by healthcare professionals and scientists.
They offer advice on diagnosis and treatment based on the latest available medical and scientific
evidence to help ensure that patients receive the best possible care. They are primarily intended
for doctors and medical staff.
How will this document help me?
This guide is based on the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Clinical Consensus Statement on
Mental Health and Cardiovascular Disease and is designed for patients and their families. It aims to
help those affected by cardiovascular disease and/or mental health disorders.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a general term for problems with the heart and blood vessels. It
usually means that the heart or blood vessels are not working as well as they should, which can lead
to serious health issues like heart attacks, strokes or heart failure.
There are several descriptions of the meaning of ‘mental health.’ This guide has chosen to use the
explanation given by the World Health Organization: “Mental health is a state of mental well-being
that enables people to cope with the stresses of life, realise their abilities, learn well, work well and
contribute to their community.”
Mental health conditions, such as depression or anxiety, can make it difficult to think, feel or behave
normally, leading to distress and problems in daily life, such as at work or in relationships. In severe
mental illnesses, such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, the person’s ability to perform daily
activities is substantially affected.
This guide will show you:
• The links between CVD and mental health
• The importance of this link for good health
• That effective treatment is possible for both conditions, singly or combined

Why focus on mental health conditions
and cardiovascular disease?
There is good evidence that CVD can lead to mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety or stress,
and vice versa. CVD and mental health conditions are often accompanied by feelings such as helplessness,
fear and anger, and you may have worries about what the future holds for you and your family. Additionally,
people with CVD and mental health conditions can struggle to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Mental health and mental health conditions interact with cardiovascular health and CVD in a
multidirectional way:
• CVD affects mental health, worsening mental health conditions or causing new conditions
• CVD and mental health conditions can interact, worsening each other
• People with mental health conditions are more likely to develop CVD
• People with mental health conditions often face unkind or mistaken views from others
• People with mental health conditions or severe mental illnesses may not receive the same quality of CVD
treatment as people without mental health conditions/illnesses
• Positive features of mental health are associated with better cardiovascular health
Mental health conditions Cardiovascular disease
Mental health Cardiovascular health
Positive mental health is linked to better
cardiovascular health and vice versa
Positive mental health means feeling good about yourself, handling everyday stresses well and enjoying
life. It’s about having a sense of purpose, being able to form good relationships, coping with challenges and
bouncing back when things go wrong. Positive mental health is linked to better cardiovascular health.
Just like physical health, your mental health can be strong and healthy when you take care of it.

The Psycho-Cardio team
If you have a CVD and/or mental health condition, you can benefit from integrated, person-centred
care. The ESC has recommended the creation of Psycho-Cardio teams to improve the care of mental
health conditions among people with CVD.
Psycho-Cardio teams are composed of multiple specialists (including nurses, doctors, psychologists,
psychiatrists) who work together for the best cardiovascular and mental health care for patients.
Mental health
professionals
Cardiovascular The Psycho-Cardio team works
Nurses specialists
with the patient and their caregivers
to provide integrated care
Integrated care
Other allied Social workers
professionals
Primary care team
It is recommended that the Psycho-Cardio team uses the ACTIVE principles to help improve mental health
in cardiovascular care. Implementing person-centred practices involves a stepped care approach, where
more treatment is given if your need increases.
A Acknowledge: you and your healthcare provider should acknowledge (recognise
or admit) that there are strong links between CVD and mental health
C Check: your healthcare team (e.g. doctor, nurse, psychologist) should check
regularly how you are feeling during your visits for cardiovascular problems
Tools: it is important that the right tools (checklists, questionnaires, etc.) are used
T
to check your mental well-being. If you think that no tool has been used by your
healthcare provider to assess your psychological status, then ask them
I
Implement: let us work together to make this happen. Sharing decisions and the
stepped care approach are needed to put changes in place
V
Venture: joint mental and cardiovascular care is often not received. It is key that
patients and professionals dare to change the system to make this happen
E Evaluate: things can change, but changes need to be evaluated by you and your
healthcare team to be sure that mental health care is changing for the better
How to work with your Psycho-Cardio team:
• Be open about your symptoms and feelings – voice your concerns
• Work with the team and inform them about what you need and like – this can ensure a good
plan is made for your care
• Make notes about how you feel after any treatment changes – this can help pinpoint what
works or does not work for you

Mental health conditions in people
with cardiovascular disease
Mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety and stress, are more common in people with CVD
than in the general population. If you have CVD, you may be at greater risk of developing a mental health
condition, such as anxiety or depression.
Screening for mental health conditions is possible and important
Some mental health conditions may be missed when patients with CVD visit the doctor or hospital. The
specialist may think that feelings like worry or fear are just a normal reaction to the CVD. These feelings
might be normal at first, but if they last for a long time or get stronger, they can cause problems.
Screening for mental health conditions is one way to make sure that you get the help that you need.
Screening usually means answering a few simple questions to work out how you are feeling and to check
if you need a more detailed assessment or support from a specialist clinician.
If no one asks you about your feelings or emotions, please talk to your healthcare professional about
how you feel.
Ask for support to find other sources of help
Even if screening turns out to be normal, it is important to know that support is available from other sources.
Psychological interventions are types of therapies that work on the mind and behaviour:
• Cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is a type of talking therapy that helps you understand and
change how you think and act. CBT can help you cope with the negative thoughts and behaviours that
contribute to the mental health condition
• Psycho-education involves learning about your emotions, thoughts, behaviours and how your brain
works. It can help you to better understand yourself and to cope with an illness, your sense of the
future and your treatment
• Mindfulness-based techniques involve paying attention to the present moment. They can help you
focus, calm down and stay grounded
Other psychological interventions like relaxation, cognitive techniques and emotional support can have
positive effects. Ask your doctor about these if you think they might benefit you.
Social prescribing is where healthcare professionals connect patients with non-medical support in their
community, for example, gardening, mindfulness or walking groups, to improve overall health and well-
being. These may be different depending on where you live. Ask your healthcare professional if you think
this type of approach may help you.
Lifestyle interventions including regular physical activity, a balanced diet, stress management techniques
(e.g. yoga), adequate sleep and positive coping strategies can be very useful to overall good health and
well-being if you have a CVD or a mental health condition. Avoiding unhealthy behaviours (such as
smoking and excessive alcohol intake) is also important.
Sometimes medications may be needed to improve your mental health. Medications are discussed later.

Remember that CVD can get better
• Not all heart problems are permanent and many can be treated or well controlled
• Some heart rhythm issues can be fixed with medication or procedures
• Conditions like heart failure are often lifelong but can be managed with long-term care
• Regular tests help doctors check your CVD and ensure that treatment is adequate, so keep
appointments when they are offered to you
• Play a key role in your care: ask questions about your CVD, understand your treatment and take
medications as prescribed
• Remember that CVD can get better but your mental health may not change in parallel - it is important to
keep talking to your healthcare team about your feelings
People with mental health conditions
and severe mental illness
If a mental health condition substantially impairs a person’s ability to carry out daily tasks and impacts
employment and/or personal and social relationships, it is called a severe mental illness (SMI). SMIs
include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder or major depression. Optimal results for most patients with SMI
are obtained when treatment, including medications, psychotherapy and other forms of support, are
combined, usually for some time.
How mental health conditions and SMI can affect your heart
If you have an SMI, you may also be at greater risk of heart disease. This can happen because SMI
can lead to low energy or motivation, a lack of exercise, smoking, poor diet and increased weight gain.
Depending on their severity, mental health conditions can make it harder to stick to healthy habits (e.g.
quitting smoking and taking medicines). SMI can also make it difficult to manage at work or cope with
family life, which can lead to stressful financial and social difficulties.
Some medications, especially for SMI, can increase the risk of heart disease by raising blood sugar and
cholesterol, causing weight gain or affecting heart rhythm.
Knowing this link helps you and your doctors prevent heart problems early.
Managing mental health conditions and SMI helps to protect your heart
Good mental health care = better heart health. Taking care of your mental health is one of the best ways to
protect your heart. You can achieve this by taking your prescribed treatment and attending regular check-
ups. Managing SMI makes it easier to maintain a healthy lifestyle, exercise, eat well and quit smoking.
Teamwork between psychiatrists, cardiologists and GPs is key. Ask the Psycho-Cardio team to assist you
to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Monitoring and routine checks of blood pressure, blood sugar, cholesterol
and body weight can help detect issues early.

Risks for heart health Ways to protect your heart
(with SMI)
Low energy and motivation → harder Stick to your mental health treatment plan
to exercise
Good mental health makes it easier to stay
Difficulty quitting smoking active and follow a heart-healthy lifestyle
Poor diet and unhealthy eating habits Develop healthy habits (exercise, diet,
quit smoking)
Weight gain (from lifestyle or medication)
Regular check-ups with your doctors
Some psychiatric medications may also
raise blood sugar and cholesterol or affect Teamwork between psychiatrists,
heart rhythm cardiologists and GPs
Financial and social difficulties Monitor and manage heart risks
Treating heart disease is the same for everyone
If you have any mental health conditions and then develop CVD, you have the right to the same
high-quality care as anyone else. Common treatments include heart medications and procedures (e.g.
stents or pacemakers). Tell your doctors about your mental health history and medications because some
heart and mental health drugs can interact and your care team may need to make adjustments. Speak
openly with your healthcare providers – they are there to help you manage both mind and body.
Check if your medicines are heart friendly
The main medication groups used in the treatment of mental health conditions and SMI are shown below.
Medication class When used
To treat mental health conditions, such as mood disorders,
Antidepressants
post-traumatic stress disorders or anxiety disorders
To stabilise mood in the treatment of bipolar disorder and sometimes,
Mood stabilisers
major depression
To treat psychotic symptoms and stabilise mood in disorders such as
Antipsychotics
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and sometimes, major depression
Temporarily used to reduce anxiety until antidepressants have started to
Anxiolytics/sedatives work. These drugs are often overused (given too often without checking if
they are really needed or if they should be stopped)
Temporarily used to treat insomnia and sleep disorder when not part of
Hypnotics
other disorders

Sticking to your medication improves your CVD. However, it is important to understand that:
• Some antipsychotic medications can affect your heart or metabolism, for example, olanzapine,
clozapine and quetiapine may cause weight gain, diabetes and increased cholesterol levels,
which all contribute to heart conditions
• Some antidepressants may cause blood pressure changes or problems with your heart rhythm.
However, newer types of antidepressants are usually safer for the heart
• Benzodiazepines (for anxiety/sleep) should be used with caution and temporarily (short term),
especially in older adults
• Smoking affects how medications work – tell your doctor if you smoke or have recently quit
• Don’t stop any medication without advice. Instead, talk to your doctor about alternatives or
ways to reduce side effects
The importance of carers and caring
for carers
Caring for someone with CVD, mental health problems or both is a big responsibility. It can be rewarding,
but also hard.
How CVD and mental health affects carers and families
When someone you love has CVD or a mental health condition, it not only affects them – it affects
you too. You may feel worried, tired or sad. Sometimes, you might feel alone or stressed. Studies show
that carers of people with CVD or mental health problems often feel more anxious and depressed
than those who are not carers.
Caring for someone with both CVD and mental health issues can be even more challenging. You may
have to help the person with medicine, doctor visits and emotional support. This can make you feel
overwhelmed or exhausted.
Carers sometimes do not get the help they need
Sometimes the healthcare system focuses only on the person who is ill and forgets about the carer’s
needs. Carers may not ask for help because they feel guilty or they might not know where to turn. You
might need help with:
• Money (like paying household bills or travel to the hospital)
• Social isolation (feeling lonely or left out)
• Emotions (feeling sad, anxious, stressed or overwhelmed)
• Mental health (dealing with depression or anxiety)
It is important to remember that your needs matter too.

Taking care of yourself is important
Looking after yourself is not selfish. It is necessary for the health of both you and the person you care
for. If you are healthy, you can give better support to your loved one. Some ways to care for yourself:
• Take breaks: Even a short walk or a few minutes to yourself can help
• Eat well and sleep enough: Your body needs energy and rest
• Talk to someone: Share your feelings with friends, family or a professional
• Do things you enjoy: Read, listen to music or spend time on hobbies
Remember, screening for mental health conditions, like anxiety, depression or post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) is important. If you feel that your mental health is suffering, talk to a healthcare
professional. Looking after your mental health can help you care better for your loved one.
Talking to your healthcare professional
You should feel comfortable talking to your doctor or nurse about your worries – not just about the person
you care for but about yourself too. Healthcare professionals have tools to help carers. They can:
• Give advice on managing stress
• Help you find support groups or counselling
• Sometimes provide information about medical, financial or social help
Other sources of help
You are not alone. There are many places and people who can help you:
• Support groups – meeting others in similar situations can make you feel less alone and provide strategies
to help you cope
• Charities – many charities offer advice, support and financial guidance
• Community or religious groups – these groups can provide friendship and practical help
• Counselling services – talking to a counsellor can help you manage stress and emotions
Ask your healthcare professional for a list of local resources or look online for groups in your area.
Healthcare professionals should:
Listen – informal caregivers must be heard as they are an invaluable source
of information and often experience much distress
Reassure – caregivers should be reassured that they are not alone and that
their emotional responses are both valid and important
i Assist – caregivers need assistance to acquire new knowledge, organise
information, follow management instructions and implement lifestyle changes
Encourage – caregivers should be encouraged to access relevant medical
and social support, both for the patient and for themselves
Refer – caregivers should be referred to relevant services to support their
health and social needs

Conclusions
CVD and mental health conditions are common – they can also increase the risks or worsen each other.
It is important that your healthcare professional assesses both your mental health and cardiovascular
health status to see if you need help. If they do not ask about your emotions, prompt them or talk to them
about your feelings.
Integrated care – different professionals in the Psycho-Cardio team working together with you – is the
best way for managing CVD and mental health conditions, with care stepped up or down as needed.
The ACTIVE principles can help the Psycho-Cardio team deliver effective integrated care.
Not all mental health conditions or heart conditions are permanent, but some are. Optimal care might
involve medicines, but other techniques, such as mindfulness training or cognitive behavioural
therapies, work too.
Both CVD and mental health conditions can have an impact on carers or family members and it is
important that they receive support if needed.
Mental health conditions Cardiovascular disease
Mental health Cardiovascular health
ACTIVE Psycho-Cardio Stepped care
principles team approach
Improved management and better outcomes

This guide for patients is a simplified version of the 2025 ESC Clinical Consensus
Statement on mental health and cardiovascular disease.
Authors
Richard Mindham, ESC Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France
Faye Forsyth, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
and Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Héctor Bueno, Multidisciplinary Translational Cardiovascular Research Group, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain, and Cardiology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre and
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12), Madrid, Spain, and Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
Christi Deaton, Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge,
United Kingdom
Claes Held, Uppsala Clinical Research Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, and Department of Medical
Sciences, Cardiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Martina Rojnic Kuzman, Department of Psychiatry and Psychological Medicine, Zagreb University Hospital Centre,
Zagreb, Croatia, and Department of Psychiatry and Psychological Medicine, Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb,
Croatia, and European Psychiatric Association, Strasbourg, France
Christos D. Lionis, Laboratory of Health and Society, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Greece, Heraklion,
Crete, Greece, and University of Limassol, Cyprus
Disclaimer
This material was adapted from the 2025 ESC Clinical Consensus Statement on mental health and cardiovascular disease
(European Heart Journal 2025 -doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehaf191) as published on 29 August 2025.
Copyright © European Society of Cardiology 2025 - All Rights Reserved.
This material has been published for personal and educational use only. No commercial use is authorised. No part of this document
may be translated or reproduced in any form without written permission from the ESC. Permission can be obtained upon submission
of a written request to ESC, Practice Guidelines Department, Les Templiers - 2035, Route des Colles - CS 80179 Biot - 06903
Sophia Antipolis Cedex - France. Email: guidelines@escardio.org
This material was adapted from the ESC Consensus Statement as an aid to patients and carers. It represents the views of the ESC
and was produced after careful consideration of the scientific and medical knowledge and the evidence available at the time of its
publication. The ESC is not responsible in the event of any contradiction, discrepancy and/or ambiguity between the ESC Consensus
Statement and any other official recommendations or guidelines issued by the relevant public health authorities, in particular in
relation to good use of healthcare or therapeutic strategies. Please refer to the preamble of the original consensus statement for
further details of the role of Consensus Statements and the individual responsibility of health professionals when making decisions
for the care of patients.
