=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ESC-Patient-Guidelines-Hypertension.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:36.805125",
  "file_size_bytes": 655684,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/ESC-Patient-Guidelines-Hypertension.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
Management of
Elevated Blood Pressure
and Hypertension:
What Patients
Need to Know
Image is for illustrative purposes only

What are Clinical Practice Guidelines?
Clinical Practice Guidelines are documents created by healthcare professionals and scientists.
They are primarily intended for doctors and medical staff and offer recommendations on
diagnosis and treatment based on the latest available medical and scientific evidence. These
guidelines help ensure that patients receive the best possible care.
How will this document help me?
This guide is designed for patients and their families. It is based on the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC) Clinical Practice Guidelines for the management of elevated blood pressure
and hypertension.
Blood pressure (BP) is the pressure of the blood flowing through your arteries. Like the air pressure
in car tyres, BP needs to be checked from time to time. If BP is too high – called ‘hypertension’ – it
can lead to major health problems. You can control your BP with the help of your medical team,
support from your family and community, and by practising a healthy lifestyle.
Lifestyle
Multidisciplinary
Medications
medical team
Patient
Family Self-care
This document provides important information to help keep your BP under control. It aims to help you
understand your condition and give you confidence to work with your healthcare team to make informed
decisions about BP management, treatment and health.

What are the risks of high
blood pressure?
Many people do not notice or feel unwell when their BP is high, so it is important to be aware of the serious
health risks that may occur if your BP is not kept under control.
Untreated high BP can damage arteries, causing them to become stiff or narrow. Fatty material can build
up in damaged arteries to the heart and brain, which may trigger a cardiovascular event, such as a heart
attack or stroke. In addition, hypertension may contribute to heart failure and may damage other organs,
including the brain, eyes and kidneys. High BP can also cause complications during pregnancy.
Cardiovascular Brain impairments
disease
Heart
Eye damage
failure
Kidney Pregnancy
problems complications
How is blood pressure measured?
BP is reported as two numbers: systolic pressure is measured when the heart is contracting and
diastolic pressure is measured when the heart is relaxing. The units for BP measurements are
‘millimetres of mercury’ or ‘mmHg’.
Systolic pressure (top number)
Measures the pressure when your heart contracts and pumps blood
Diastolic pressure (bottom number)
Measures the pressure when your heart relaxes between beats
Keeping your BP in a healthy range is important to protect your blood vessels, heart and other organs.
Normal BP is considered to be less than 120/70 mmHg.
It is recommended that everyone under 40 years of age should have their BP measured every 3 years.
People over 40 years should have theirs checked every year.

How is high blood pressure
(hypertension) diagnosed?
BP that is consistently 140/90 mmHg or higher is termed ‘hypertension.’ Diagnosing
hypertension can be achieved in different settings using different techniques to measure BP
accurately. It sometimes requires multiple BP checks to confirm a diagnosis.
BP may be checked at the doctor’s office during a visit to your healthcare professional.
If needed, healthcare professionals may arrange for ambulatory BP monitoring (or ‘ABPM’),
where BP is checked over a 24-hour period using a special device.
You may also be asked to carry out ‘home BP monitoring’ (or ‘HBPM’) using a BP monitor.
You should check your BP by taking at least two recordings in the morning and in the
evening, over several days. Your healthcare team will work out your average BP reading.
Home BP monitoring
Use a validated BP monitor Measure BP in a quiet room Obtain two readings
after 5 mins of rest with arm on each occasion,
and back supported 1-2 mins apart
Obtain readings morning Record your readings
and evening for at least 3 and show them to your
and ideally 7 days healthcare team
Healthcare providers decide whether you have normal BP, elevated BP or hypertension,
depending on your BP measurements and where they were taken:
BP measured at the doctor’s office (mmHg) BP measured at home (mmHg)
Not elevated Less than 120/70 Less than 120/70
Elevated More than 120/70 but less than 140/90 More than 120/70 but less than 135/85
Hypertension Equal to or more than 140/90 Equal to or more than 135/85
If you have not done so already, it is important to seek medical advice if your BP is
consistently higher than 120/70 mmHg to discuss treatment strategies.

Elevated BP: If your BP is between 120/70 and 140/90 mmHg, lifestyle changes are
recommended. Improving your diet and increasing physical activity can significantly lower
your BP and prevent it from rising further. In some individuals with elevated BP, such as
those with other health conditions, BP-lowering medication may also be recommended.
High BP (hypertension): If you have confirmed BP measurements of 140/90 mmHg or
more, you will need to take BP-lowering medication in addition to adopting a healthy
lifestyle. Individuals with hypertension often have other factors that may increase the
risk of serious health conditions. The healthcare team may test blood and urine samples
to measure blood sugar, cholesterol and kidney function. An electrocardiogram may be
ordered to check the heart’s rhythm. If you know you have conditions like diabetes, high
cholesterol, heart disease or kidney problems, you should tell your healthcare professional.
Key actions to control your
blood pressure
Actively managing your own BP is very important. Here, you can learn about the different
ways to control your own BP so you can take action.
Regular monitoring
Tracking your BP consistently is extremely helpful and recommended. Regular monitoring
helps you understand the trends of your BP over time and identify factors that may affect
your BP. This is important information to share with your healthcare provider.
• Measure your blood pressure weekly
• Observe any changes or trends
• Speak to your healthcare team to discuss adjustments to your treatment plan if your BP
readings consistently rise
Lifestyle changes
Taking proactive steps, such as adopting a healthy diet and engaging in regular exercise,
can lower your BP and protect your heart and other organs, improving your overall health.
Adopt a
healthy lifestyle
Reduce your blood Lower your risk of heart
pressure levels attacks, stroke and
other health problems
A healthy lifestyle is important for all people with elevated or high BP, whether you are
taking BP-lowering medication or not.

Why make this change? What do I need to do?
Lowering your salt
consumption can significantly Aim for less than 5 g of salt per day
Reduce salt intake reduce BP levels
Potassium-rich foods can help
lessen the effects of sodium Eat bananas, avocados, spinach and/or beans
Increase potassium and lower BP
intake
Cutting back on sugary drinks
can help prevent weight gain Choose water or unsweetened drinks
and reduce BP spikes
Limit sugary drinks
The recommended level of exercise is 150 minutes
of moderate-intensity physical activity a week (e.g.
Engaging in regular physical 30 minutes a day, 5 days a week)
activity strengthens your heart,
Increase your current level of physical activity
enabling it to pump blood more
gradually to recommended levels if your health
Regular physical efficiently, which decreases the
status allows
activity pressure on your arteries
Brisk walking may be sufficient
Strength training also helps
Achieving and maintaining a If your body mass index is greater than 25, reduce
healthy weight reduces the your food intake and increase your activity to
burden on your heart, lowering bring about gradual weight loss. Your healthcare
Maintain a healthy
your BP provider can provide more specific guidance
body weight
A balanced diet supports
Prioritise fruits, vegetables, whole grains and lean
overall heart health and helps
proteins in your diet
Maintain a manage BP
healthy diet
Smoking damages your blood
Speak to your healthcare provider for advice on
vessels and raises BP. Quitting
a smoking cessation strategy that suits you e.g.
can help restore your heart and
using nicotine replacement therapy
Quit smoking vascular health
No alcohol is healthiest
Women and people over 65 years of age should
drink no more than 1 drink a day and no more than
Excessive alcohol consumption 7 drinks per week
can cause an increase in BP Men should drink no more than 2 drinks a day and
Limit alcohol
no more than 14 drinks per week
consumption
Do not start drinking alcohol if you currently don’t
consume alcohol

Medication
In addition to adopting a healthy lifestyle, people with hypertension will need to take medication to lower
their BP. Medication may also be necessary in people with elevated BP who have other diseases, like
diabetes, a history of heart disease or stroke.
Your healthcare team will discuss the type of medication that is best for you. In most cases, a combination
of two or more drugs is recommended. Regular follow-up visits are essential to adjust your treatment plan
as needed.
NEVER
ALWAYS DECIDE
DECIDE
DISCUSS TOGETHER
about your treatment
your ideas with your with your healthcare
ON YOUR
doctor or nurse provider on the best
OWN (and/or pharmacist) treatment for you
The most common types of BP-lowering medication are shown below. Other types of medicines may also
be used based on your individual medical history.
Medication class How can they help me? When used
Angiotensin-
converting enzyme
Help relax your blood vessels to make it easier
inhibitors
for your heart to pump blood to lower your BP
(e.g., enalapril,
ramipril)
Angiotensin II
receptor blockers Block a hormone that tightens blood vessels, These drugs are
(e.g., losartan, helping them to relax and lower BP often the first type of
valsartan) medication to be used
due to strong evidence
of BP reduction
Calcium channel
Stop calcium from entering your heart and blood and prevention of
blockers
vessel cells to help blood vessels relax and cardiovascular events
(e.g., amlodipine,
reduce BP
nifedipine)
Diuretics
Help your body get rid of excess salt and water
(e.g.,
to reduce the amount of fluid in your blood and
hydrochlorothiazide,
lower BP
chlorthalidone)
These drugs are often
Beta-blockers combined with other
Slow your heart rate and reduce the force of
(e.g., atenolol, BP-lowering drugs in
each heartbeat to lower your BP
bisoprolol) individuals with heart
disease
Mineralocorticoid
receptor
Help your body to get rid of salt while keeping These drugs are useful
antagonists
potassium in difficult-to-control BP
(e.g., spironolactone,
eplerenone)

Skills for taking pills
Treatment adherence means taking your medication as agreed with your healthcare provider.
Adherence is essential for your medication to work properly.
You can establish good medication-taking habits by following the PILLS strategy:
Prompt: Place the medications or a reminder somewhere visible in your home. This can act as a
trigger to take them each day. Audible prompts such as phone alarms or text reminders can help.
Include others: Family members or friends may be able to remind you to take your medications or
support you to have access to an adequate supply of medications at all times.
Link it to events: Taking medications at the same time as regular daily events that happen in your
usual context can help strengthen the habit e.g. on waking, going to bed or around meal times.
Let your doctor or pharmacist know if you are having trouble with your medication: Your doctor
or pharmacist may be able to make things easier by consolidating your medications, particularly
if you are taking several medications e.g. using combination medications, deprescribing some
medications or providing them in reminder packaging.
Self-monitoring: Keeping a record of your medication taking may be helpful, using a pen and
paper or digitally. This could be done in conjunction with self BP monitoring.
Final thoughts
Taking a proactive approach to controlling your BP will greatly lower your risk of serious
health issues. Take charge of your BP: check it regularly, make healthy lifestyle changes and
follow your treatment plan. Always collaborate with your healthcare provider so the plan fits
well with your needs.
Testimony of a patient with high blood pressure
“As someone living with high blood pressure, I have learned that controlling it is not just about
managing the numbers – it’s about protecting my overall health and quality of life.
High blood pressure often has no symptoms, so it can be easy to underestimate its seriousness.
However, left unmanaged, it significantly increases the risk of life-threatening conditions like strokes,
heart attacks and kidney disease.
For me, controlling my blood pressure is a daily commitment to better health. Simple changes, like
reducing salt intake, exercising regularly and managing stress has made a
big difference.
Taking prescribed medications as directed is also essential, even when I feel fine. I have
come to understand that consistency is key, as even fluctuations in blood pressure can still pose
risks.
Regular monitoring helps me to stay aware of my progress and spot potential problems early.
Knowing I am reducing my risks over the long term gives me confidence that I will improve my
chances of ageing with good functional health that will allow me to remain independent and active.
Through lifestyle changes and working closely with my healthcare professionals, I have learned that
the effort I put in today will pay off in a healthier, more fulfilling future.”
– ESC Patient Forum member.

Glossary
Hypertension: Hypertension is a condition where the blood pressure in the arteries is persistently
high. Normal blood pressure is below 120/70 mmHg. Hypertension is diagnosed when readings are
consistently 140/90 mmHg or higher.
Systolic pressure: This is the top number in a blood pressure reading. It measures the pressure in your
arteries when your heart contracts.
Diastolic pressure: This is the bottom number in a blood pressure reading. It measures the pressure in
your arteries when your heart relaxes between beats.
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors: These drugs work by relaxing blood vessels and
reducing the workload on the heart. Examples include enalapril and ramipril.
ARBs (angiotensin II receptor blockers): These drugs relax blood vessels but work differently
from ACE inhibitors. They block a substance that causes blood vessels to tighten. Examples include
losartan and valsartan.
Calcium channel blockers: These medications lower blood pressure by preventing calcium from
entering the cells of the heart and blood vessel walls, which helps relax the vessels. Examples are
amlodipine and nifedipine.
Diuretics: Sometimes called ‘water pills,’ diuretics help the kidneys remove excess salt and water
from the body, reducing blood volume and lowering blood pressure. Common diuretics include
hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone.
Beta-blockers: These drugs work by slowing down the heart rate and reducing the force of the
heartbeat, effectively lowering blood pressure. They are often prescribed for heart disease and are
used less frequently for hypertension. Examples include atenolol and bisoprolol.
MRAs (mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists): These help the body get rid of excess salt while
retaining potassium, which is beneficial for patients with difficult-to-treat forms of hypertension.
Examples include spironolactone and eplerenone.
SGLT2 (sodium-glucose co-transporter 2) inhibitors: Originally developed for diabetes
management, these drugs also have benefits in lowering blood pressure and reducing cardiovascular
risks by helping the kidneys excrete more glucose and sodium. Examples include dapagliflozin and
empagliflozin.
Labetalol: Often used in pregnancy, this medication helps manage hypertension by relaxing blood
vessels and reducing heart rate.
Additional terms
White coat hypertension: Elevated blood pressure readings only when at the doctor’s office, likely
due to anxiety. Home readings are normal.
Masked hypertension: Normal blood pressure readings in the doctor’s office but high readings at
home, potentially due to less stress in the medical environment.

This guide for patients is a simplified version of the ESC Clinical Practice Guidelines
for the management of elevated blood pressure and hypertension.
Authors
Eva Gerdts, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, and Department of Heart Disease,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Julie Harris (United Kingdom), ESC Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France.
John William McEvoy, Department of Cardiology, University of Galway School of Medicine, Galway, Ireland, and
National Institute for Prevention and Cardiovascular Health, Galway, Ireland.
Gerard J. Molloy, School of Psychology, University of Galway, Galway, Ireland.
Bart Scheenaerts (Belgium), ESC Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France.
Rhian M. Touyz, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, Department of Family Medicine, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada, and the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada.
Izabella Uchmanowicz, Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, Department of Nursing, Wroclaw, Medical University,
Wroclaw, Poland.
Disclaimer
This material was adapted from the 2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of elevated blood pressure and hypertension
(European Heart Journal 2024 - doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehae178) as published on 30 August 2024.
Copyright © European Society of Cardiology 2024 - All Rights Reserved.
This material has been published for personal and educational use only. No commercial use is authorised. No part of this document
may be translated or reproduced in any form without written permission from the ESC. Permission can be obtained upon submission
of a written request to ESC, Practice Guidelines Department, Les Templiers - 2035, Route des Colles - CS 80179 Biot - 06903
Sophia Antipolis Cedex - France. Email: guidelines@escardio.org
This material was adapted from the ESC Guidelines as an aid to patients and carers. It represents the views of the ESC and
was produced after careful consideration of the scientific and medical knowledge and the evidence available at the time of their
publication. The ESC is not responsible in the event of any contradiction, discrepancy and/or ambiguity between the ESC Guidelines
and any other official recommendations or guidelines issued by the relevant public health authorities, in particular in relation to good
use of healthcare or therapeutic strategies. Please refer to the preamble of the original guidelines for further details of the role of
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the individual responsibility of health professionals when making decisions for the care of patients.
