=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "guidance-on-the-use-of-glycoprotein-iibiiia-inhibitors-in-the-treatment-of-acute-coronary-syndromes-pdf-2294582158789.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:22.809215",
  "file_size_bytes": 161378,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/guidance-on-the-use-of-glycoprotein-iibiiia-inhibitors-in-the-treatment-of-acute-coronary-syndromes-pdf-2294582158789.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Guidance on the use of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitors in the treatment
of acute coronary
syndromes
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 5 September 2002
Last updated: 1 March 2010
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta47
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 3 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Contents
1 Recommendations .................................................................................................................... 4
2 Clinical need and practice ....................................................................................................... 5
3 The technology ........................................................................................................................ 7
3.1 Abciximab (ReoPro) ......................................................................................................................... 7
3.2 Eptifibatide (Integrilin) .................................................................................................................... 7
3.3 Tirofiban (Aggrastat) ...................................................................................................................... 8
4 Evidence and interpretation .................................................................................................... 9
4.1 Clinical effectiveness ...................................................................................................................... 9
4.2 Cost effectiveness .......................................................................................................................... 12
4.3 Consideration of the evidence ...................................................................................................... 14
5 Recommendations for further research ................................................................................. 16
6 Implications for the NHS .......................................................................................................... 17
7 Implementation and audit ........................................................................................................ 18
8 Appraisal committee members ...............................................................................................20
9 Sources of evidence considered by the committee .............................................................24
10 Detail on criteria for audit of the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment
of acute coronary syndromes ....................................................................................................25
Possible objectives for the audit ......................................................................................................... 25
Possible patients to be included in the audit ..................................................................................... 25
Calculation of compliance with the measure ..................................................................................... 28
Update information .....................................................................................................................30
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 4 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
This guidance replaces TA12.
This guidance is partially replaced by CG94.
1 Recommendations
1.1 This recommendation no longer stands.
1.2 This recommendation has been updated and replaced by recommendation 1.1.5 in
the NICE guideline on acute coronary syndromes.
1.3 This recommendation has been updated and replaced by recommendation 1.1.5 in
the NICE guideline on acute coronary syndromes.
1.4 This recommendation has been updated and replaced by recommendations 1.2.7
and 1.2.8 in the NICE guideline on acute coronary syndromes.
1.5 This recommendation no longer stands.
1.6 This recommendation no longer stands.
1.7 It is recommended that a glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitor is considered as an
adjunct to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for all patients with diabetes
undergoing elective PCI, and for those patients undergoing complex procedures
(for example, multi-vessel PCI, insertion of multiple stents, vein graft PCI or PCI
for bifurcation lesions); currently only abciximab is licensed as an adjunct to PCI.
In procedurally uncomplicated, elective PCI, where the risk of adverse sequelae is
low, use of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is not recommended unless unexpected
immediate complications occur.
1.8 GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are not currently licensed in the UK for use as an adjunct to
thrombolytic therapy in ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 5 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
2 Clinical need and practice
2.1 Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the most common cause of death in the UK. It is
a progressive disease. The first presenting symptom is often stable angina (pain
in the chest on exertion), which may progress to an acute coronary syndrome
(ACS). ACSs encompass a range of symptoms with broadly similar underlying
causes. They include ischaemic cardiac chest pain of recent origin in the
categories:
• non-ST-segment-elevation ACS, including unstable angina and non-ST-
segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
• myocardial infarction (MI) with ST-segment-elevation (an acute myocardial
infarction [MI], also known as STEMI).
2.2 Unstable angina covers a range of clinical states falling between stable angina
and acute MI, including angina at rest lasting more than 20 minutes, increasing
angina and angina occurring more than 24 hours after an acute MI.
2.3 NSTEMI (also known as non-Q-wave MI) is the term used when the cardiac
markers (troponins and creatine kinase [CK]) are elevated to ranges that indicate
that MI has occurred, but a Q-wave does not develop on electrocardiogram (ECG)
tracings. This profile is thought to indicate damage to the heart muscle that does
not extend through the full thickness of the myocardium. NSTEMI therefore
represents a subgroup of patients with non-ST-elevation ACS at high risk of a
subsequent event.
2.4 In 1998, the overall prevalence of CHD in England was estimated to be 7.1% in
men and 4.6% in women. Prevalence increases with age. It is difficult to estimate
the incidence of ACS in England and Wales. The hospital episode statistics for
2000 to 2001 detail 148,000 episodes of angina pectoris in England, with 83,000
of these specified as unstable angina. However, there are variations in the coding
of this condition, and it has been suggested that these figures are conservative.
Recently, the incidence of unstable angina has been estimated at 226 cases per
100,000 population, which equates to approximately 120,000 cases in England
and Wales per annum.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 6 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
2.5 In 1999, in England and Wales, there were over 115,000 deaths caused by CHD.
Although CHD-associated mortality rates are falling by about 4% per year in the
UK, this does not reflect a fall in incidence of the disease. In addition,
improvements in rates of death from CHD have not been uniform across all social
classes; death rates among unskilled men are 3 times greater than those among
professional men.
2.6 The main aim in the short-term management of non-ST-segment-elevation ACS
is to control pain and prevent progression to full-thickness MI (STEMI) and/or
death. The first steps in the management pathway involve bed rest and medical
treatment including antiplatelet therapy (aspirin), anticoagulants (heparin and
low-molecular-weight heparin [LMWH]), vasodilators (nitrates), calcium-channel
blockers and beta-blockers. Revascularisation, when necessary, is by means of
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), usually with stent implantation, or by
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
2.7 Certain patients with unstable angina are at high risk of progression to MI or
death. The British Cardiac Society guidelines say that certain circumstances are
associated with an increased risk of early adverse outcome, including age above
65 years; comorbidity, especially diabetes; prolonged (more than 15 minutes)
cardiac pain at rest; ischaemic ECG ST-segment depression on admission or
during symptoms; ECG T-wave inversion (associated with an intermediate risk,
lying between that associated with ST-segment depression and normal ECG);
evidence of impairment of left ventricular function (either pre-existing or during
MI); and elevated C-reactive protein. In addition, those with raised levels of
cardiac troponin are considered to be at high risk of an event.
2.8 Despite the use of standard therapy (antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants), the
rate of adverse outcomes (such as death, non-fatal re-infarction, refractory
angina or readmission for unstable angina) at 6 months after presenting with
unstable angina is about 30%.
2.9 In guidance issued in September 2000, NICE recommended the intravenous use
of glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors, in addition to aspirin and low (adjusted)
dose unfractionated heparin, for patients with unstable angina at high risk of
death or further MI. NICE's guidance recommended intravenous administration of
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors to patients undergoing acute or elective PCI.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 7 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
3 The technology
3.1 Abciximab (ReoPro)
3.1.1 Abciximab is a monoclonal antibody that targets the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
receptor on the surface of platelets.
3.1.2 Abciximab is indicated as an adjunct to aspirin and heparin for the prevention of
ischaemic complications in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI). It is also indicated for the short-term (1 month) reduction of
risk of myocardial infarction (MI) in patients who have unstable angina that is not
responding to full conventional therapy and who are to undergo PCI. Abciximab is
administered intravenously at an initial bolus dose of 250 microgram/kg body
weight followed by a maintenance dose of 0.125 microgram/kg/min (maximum
10 microgram/min) over 12 to 36 hours.
3.1.3 As with the other GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, the side effects of abciximab (including
bleeding and thrombocytopenia) are related to its pharmacological effects. For
full details of side effects and contraindications, see the summary of product
characteristics.
3.1.4 The cost of abciximab is £280 (net) for a 10-mg vial (BNF 43rd edition). For a
70-kg person, the cost per course ranges from £840 to £1,120, depending on the
duration of treatment (costs rounded to full vials).
3.2 Eptifibatide (Integrilin)
3.2.1 Eptifibatide is a synthetic cyclic heptapeptide and is 1 of the small-molecule GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitors. It reversibly inhibits platelet aggregation by preventing the
binding of fibrinogen and other adhesive ligands to the GP IIb/IIIa receptor.
3.2.2 Eptifibatide is indicated for the prevention of early MI in patients presenting with
unstable angina or non-Q-wave MI (NSTEMI) who have had chest pain within the
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 8 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
last 24 hours and who have electrocardiogram (ECG) changes and/or elevated
cardiac enzymes. It is administered intravenously at an initial bolus dose of
180 microgram/kg followed by a maintenance dose of 2.0 microgram/kg/min for
up to 72 hours (up to 96 hours if the patient has a PCI during treatment).
3.2.3 As with the other GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, the side effects of eptifibatide (including
bleeding and thrombocytopenia) are related to its pharmacological effects. For
full details of side effects and contraindications, see the summary of product
characteristics.
3.2.4 The cost of eptifibatide is £15.54 (net) for a 20-mg vial and £48.84 (net) for a
75-mg vial (BNF 43rd edition). For a 70-kg person, the cost per course ranges
from £455 to £553, depending on the duration of treatment (costs rounded to full
vials).
3.3 Tirofiban (Aggrastat)
3.3.1 Tirofiban is a non-peptidal antagonist of the GP IIb/IIIa receptor and is 1 of the
small-molecule GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. It prevents fibrinogen from binding to the GP
IIb/IIIa receptor, thus blocking platelet aggregation.
3.3.2 Tirofiban is indicated for the prevention of early MI in patients presenting with
unstable angina or NSTEMI who have had chest pain within the last 12 hours and
who have ECG changes and/or elevated cardiac enzymes. It is administered
intravenously at an initial dose of 0.4 microgram/kg/min for 30 minutes followed
by a maintenance dose of 0.1 microgram/kg/min for at least 48 hours, up to a
maximum duration of treatment of 108 hours.
3.3.3 As with the other GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors, the side effects of tirofiban (including
bleeding and thrombocytopenia) are related to its pharmacological effects. For
full details of side effects and contraindications, see the summary of product
characteristics.
3.3.4 The cost of tirofiban is £146.11 (net) for a 12.5-mg vial (BNF 43rd edition). For a
70-kg person, the cost per course ranges from £292 to £584, depending on the
duration of treatment (costs rounded to full vials).
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 9 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
4 Evidence and interpretation
The appraisal committee considered evidence from a number of sources. Each indication
was considered separately.
4.1 Clinical effectiveness
4.1.1 GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors for the medical management of ACSs
4.1.1.1 The assessment group found 1 new study (GUSTO IV), in addition to 4 studies
from the previous appraisal that are relevant to this review. All were classified as
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that included patients with unstable angina or
NSTEMI, but the definitions of the participants varied between trials. Two studies
looked at eptifibatide, 2 at tirofiban and 1 at abciximab; all these studies
compared treatment with placebo or no treatment. On the whole, the studies
were well conducted. Outcome measures included death, myocardial infarction
(MI), need for revascularisation and adverse events associated with use of the
trial drugs. Differences between trials precluded pooling results in the
assessment report.
4.1.1.2 In nearly all studies involving the small-molecule glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
inhibitors (eptifibatide and tirofiban), the rates of death and MI were reduced in
the treatment groups compared with the comparator group; however, the
difference was not always statistically significant. In all of the trials, the risk of
bleeding was greater in the groups receiving a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor than in the
comparator group, but the difference was not always statistically significant.
4.1.1.3 In the GUSTO-IV trial of abciximab, the results demonstrated neither benefit nor
trends of benefit in the primary outcomes of death and MI at 30 days.
4.1.1.4 The assessment group concluded that the effects of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors were
small compared with those of other interventions in acute coronary syndrome
(ACS), for example aspirin. Subgroup analyses showed that GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
may be particularly effective in troponin-positive patients. A recently published
meta-analysis seen by the committee (the Boersma study) analysed the data for
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 10 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
various subgroups and suggested that, in those not routinely scheduled for early
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), the rate of cardiac complications is
reduced following the administration of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors.
4.1.1.5 The submissions for this appraisal from consultees (manufacturers or sponsors,
professional, and patient or carer groups) contained no clinical evidence on the
use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors for the medical management of ACS that had not
already been included in the assessment report.
4.1.1.6 The clinical experts were asked about the evidence for medical management in
those not going on to have a PCI during GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor administration, which
is frequently the scenario in current UK practice. They stated that current
evidence-based good practice is to investigate, by means of coronary
angiography, with a view to early revascularisation, all of those patients
presenting with ACS deemed to be at high enough risk to merit a GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor.
4.1.1.7 They were also asked to comment on the importance of various risk factors used
to identify high-risk ACS patients. They considered that an elevated troponin
result often confirms the high-risk status of an individual, but that increased
troponin should not be thought of as the only indicator of high risk and that other
clinical factors have to be taken into account.
4.1.2 GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors as an adjunct to PCI
4.1.2.1 The assessment group found 5 new trials (PRICE, ADMIRAL, TACTICS-TIMI,
TARGET and ESPRIT), in addition to 12 studies from the previous appraisal that
are relevant to this review. Fourteen trials compared treatment with placebo or no
treatment, 10 of which involved abciximab, 3 involved eptifibatide and 1 involved
tirofiban. There were 2 head-to-head trials, 1 of abciximab and eptifibatide and 1
of abciximab and tirofiban. One further trial compared invasive and conservative
treatment, with all participants receiving tirofiban. The definition of participants
both within and between trials was broad, from patients undergoing elective PCI
to those who had acute PCI after MI. All trials were classified as RCTs, and many
of them were large (with at least 1,000 participants). Outcomes measured
included death, non-fatal MI, the need for PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 11 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
(CABG) after the current procedure, and adverse events.
4.1.2.2 Again, the results of the trials were not pooled for the assessment report because
of heterogeneity, which included differences between studies in the inclusion
criteria for patients undergoing the procedure. Only 1 trial showed the use of a GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitor to be associated with a significant reduction in the mortality rate
at 30 days; another trial showed significant reduction in the mortality rate at
6 months. The use of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor was associated with a reduction in the
rate of revascularisation at 30 days and at 6 months in studies in which this was
measured, but the difference was statistically significant in 1 trial only.
4.1.2.3 However, with composite outcomes (usually a combination of death, subsequent
MI and revascularisation), the great majority of trials showed a statistically
significant benefit of treatment with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor. There were more minor
and major bleeds in the treatment groups in all studies, but the increased rates
were not always statistically significant. There was little evidence of benefit for
subgroups.
4.1.2.4 The only new data submitted on the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors during PCI were
longer-term data from 2 trials (ESPRIT and EPIC), some re-analysis of the existing
data, and data from a recent UK audit presented by the British Cardiac Society
and Royal College of Physicians (London).
4.1.2.5 The clinical experts were asked to comment on the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors as
an adjunct during elective PCI. Their view was that elective single-vessel PCI in a
low-risk patient carries a very small absolute risk of complications. Consequently,
the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in such low-risk patients was generally considered
unlikely to confer any clinically significant additional benefit; GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
should only be used in these circumstances if unexpected complications occur.
Conversely, the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors as an adjunct to PCI was considered
beneficial in patients with evidence of recent ACS, in patients with diabetes and
in patients undergoing potentially complex PCI, which might include multivessel
disease, the use of multiple stents, PCI of a vein graft or PCI of bifurcation
lesions.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 12 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
4.2 Cost effectiveness
4.2.1 GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors for the medical management of ACSs
4.2.1.1 The assessment group found no additional cost-effectiveness studies beyond the
7 included in the previous appraisal of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. None of these studies
were UK-based. Since management of ACS in the UK differs from that in other
developed countries, particularly in regard to the rate of PCI, the results were not
considered to be applicable to the UK. Economic models for tirofiban and
eptifibatide were submitted by the manufacturers for the original appraisal.
4.2.1.2 The eptifibatide manufacturer's model was based on a prospective economic
evaluation conducted as part of the PURSUIT trial. Based on the subgroup of
patients from Western Europe (12% of the total patients), the cost per life-year
gained for eptifibatide was estimated as £8,179 to £11,079. Although lifetime
survival duration was modelled, no extrapolation of costs over the patients'
lifetime was attempted and it is not clear how this would impact on the results.
4.2.1.3 The tirofiban manufacturer's model reported that 22% of the cost of tirofiban is
offset by savings due to the reduction in events. The lack of a standardised
outcome measure makes it difficult to interpret these results in relation to other
treatments. The absolute reduction in event rates associated with tirofiban was
not adjusted for UK-specific, baseline-event rates.
4.2.2 Use as an adjunct to PCI
4.2.2.1 A further 6 economic studies in the literature were identified in addition to the 17
studies included in the original appraisal, but none of these fully reflects current
UK practice and the long-term costs and consequences. The original appraisal
also considered the manufacturer's submission for abciximab.
4.2.2.2 In the manufacturer's model for abciximab, for patients undergoing urgent and
elective PCIs in a UK setting, estimates of cost per quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) ranged from £6,941 to £9,053 based on the EPILOG trial and from £3,949
to £5,151 based on the EPISTENT trial. These estimates must be interpreted with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 13 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
caution for the following reasons: the baseline risk of events is different in the UK
from that in the trials; the assumption that patients surviving the first year will live
for a further 15 years ignores variability of prognosis; and it may not be valid to
assume that costs do not differ between treatment options over a period of 2 to
15 years.
4.2.3 Assessment group model
4.2.3.1 The assessment group developed a UK-specific model to look at the optimal use
and timing of use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in ACS patients. The model estimated
health outcomes in terms of QALYs and had a lifetime time horizon. Four
treatment strategies for GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors were compared:
• a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor used as part of initial management, with treatment
begun immediately in all ACS patients at the time they were identified
• a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor started only after making a decision to carry out PCI
• a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor used as an adjunct to PCI, started up to 1 hour before
the procedure
• no use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors.
An additional analysis looked at initial management in high-risk ACS patients
only (defined as those with at least 1 of 3 factors: age over 70 years,
diabetes, ST-depression). Initially, baseline event rates were calculated
based on PRAIS-UK and Leeds audit data. Since PCI rates here may be lower
than in current practice, an alternative analysis using the Boersma meta-
analysis was performed. The model applied relative risks from all available
trials and from the Boersma data. All analyses showed that use of GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitors in initial management was the preferred strategy. Depending on the
assumptions used, estimates of cost per QALY ranged from £4,605 to
£11,671. However, the most cost-effective option was initial medical
management in the subgroup of high-risk patients only, with cost per QALY
estimated at £3,966. The additional benefit of use in all patients compared to
use in high-risk patients alone was gained at a cost per QALY of £91,000.
When using GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors as an adjunct to PCI was compared with not
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 14 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
using them, the base-case cost per QALY was £25,811; this was reduced to
£11,160 if baseline event rates based on Boersma data were applied.
4.2.3.2 In summary, the assessment report model, which is the closest representation of
current UK practice available, indicates that the most cost-effective strategy is
for GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors to be used as part of the initial medical management of
high-risk ACS patients, irrespective of whether angiography with a view to PCI is
performed. Although early angiography with a view to PCI is considered to be of
benefit in the initial management of high-risk ACS patients, this was not assessed
in the model and is not within the scope of the present guidance. The model
suggests that the cost effectiveness of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors is not dependent on
whether a PCI is performed; therefore, their administration does not need to be
delayed until a decision is made to carry out PCI. The use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
as an adjunct during PCI only is also less cost effective than their use in initial
medical management.
4.3 Consideration of the evidence
4.3.1 The committee considered the evidence available and the viewpoints expressed
by the experts on the current management of ACS patients in the UK. It was
emphasised that this appraisal related solely to the use of the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
in the management of ACS, and that it did not extend to the role of PCI or the
management of ACS in general.
4.3.2 Historically, PCI rates have been lower in the UK than in the countries where the
majority of the published trials of the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in ACS have been
carried out. The committee took this into account when considering the validity
of these trials in relation to current UK practice, together with evidence from the
experts suggesting that PCI rates in the UK are now rising by approximately 20%
per annum.
4.3.3 The committee considered that the assessment group model provided the best
estimates of cost effectiveness for the UK and, on the balance of clinical and cost
effectiveness, the committee concluded that use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors for initial
medical management in high-risk patients was the preferred treatment strategy.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 15 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
4.3.4 The current licensed indications for the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are for use with
aspirin and unfractionated heparin. However, the committee recognised that low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) is used widely in the management of ACS in
place of unfractionated heparin, and was aware of the ongoing trials using GP IIb/
IIIa inhibitors in conjunction with LMWH.
4.3.5 If GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are to be used as part of medical management in high-risk
patients, the committee thought that it was important that treatment should be
initiated as soon as possible. This proves problematic if raised troponin alone is
used to identify high-risk status, as the earliest that raised troponin levels can be
accurately detected is 6 to 12 hours after the onset of chest pain. The committee
considered that, in the presence of sufficient high-risk factors, GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor
treatment should be initiated without delaying to confirm high-risk status with a
positive cardiac troponin test.
4.3.6 The committee considered that those ACS patients undergoing PCI should be
treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor. In situations where this is not covered by initial
medical management, the committee thought that the administration of a GP IIb/
IIIa inhibitor would still be appropriate. No clinical trial evidence is available on a
strategy that involves a second administration of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (that is,
after initial medical management) for a delayed PCI.
4.3.7 At the same time, the committee considered that, for clinically stable patients
without diabetes who are undergoing procedurally uncomplicated, routine,
elective single-vessel PCI, GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors may not be necessary and
therefore should not be recommended for routine use unless unexpected
immediate complications occur. The low risk of adverse events during such PCI
procedures is demonstrated by UK audit data submitted by the British Cardiac
Society and Royal College of Physicians (London).
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 16 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
5 Recommendations for further research
5.1 All of the trials currently available looked at the glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors
in conjunction with heparin, in line with their licensed indications. There is an
ongoing trial (A-Z trial) looking at the use of tirofiban in conjunction with low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH); INTERACT, another ongoing trial, is looking at
a combination of eptifibatide with a LMWH (enoxaparin). As LMWH is widely used
instead of standard heparin, the results of these trials are awaited with interest.
5.2 The effects of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in current UK practice should be investigated
in carefully designed research to assess their benefits in non-ST-segment-
elevation acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in patients who are not scheduled for
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
5.3 Research should be carried out to investigate the efficacy of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors
in subgroups such as women. A recently published meta-analysis of patient-level
data has suggested that GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors may have no benefit in the medical
management of ACS in women.
5.4 The results of the CURE trial may lead to a consideration of the use of clopidogrel
for the management of patients with ACS. Research to establish the relative roles
of the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors and clopidogrel in the short-term management of
patients with ACS will be necessary.
5.5 Research is needed to establish the statistical relationship between clinical risk
factors and troponin levels, so as to assess the value added by the troponin
result in the determination of risk level.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 17 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
6 Implications for the NHS
6.1 Replacement of the September 2000 guidance with this revised guidance is not
anticipated to increase costs to the NHS. Fewer patients undergoing elective
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) will receive glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
inhibitors, which may result in some cost savings. Under the previous guidance it
was assumed that a positive troponin test would be used to identify high risk and
that therefore approximately one-third of people admitted with acute coronary
syndrome (ACS) would receive a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor. The prevalence of the risk
factors described in 1.4 among people admitted with ACS is unknown, but
assuming a similar proportion will be identified as being at high risk as would
have been identified using the troponin result, the impact of this section of the
guidance remains unchanged.
6.2 The British Cardiovascular Intervention Society audit recorded 30,916 PCIs in
NHS centres during 2000. However, since there are only limited data as to the
case-mix of patients undergoing these procedures estimation of budget impact
cannot be made.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 18 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
7 Implementation and audit
7.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
7.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the
7.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has acute coronary syndromes and the healthcare professional
responsible for their care thinks that glycoprotein (GP) IIb or IIIa inhibitors is the
right treatment, they should be available for use, in line with NICE's
recommendations.
7.4 All clinicians who treat people with an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) should
review their current policies and practice in line with the guidance set out in
section 1.
7.5 Local guidelines or care pathways, particularly those on the management of
patients with unstable angina or myocardial infarction (MI), should incorporate
the guidance in section 1.
7.6 To measure compliance locally with the guidance, the following criteria could be
used. Further details of suggestions for audit are in section 10.
7.7 The following groups of patients receive an intravenous small-molecule GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor (eptifibatide or tirofiban) as part of their initial medical management
(together with aspirin and unfractionated heparin):
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 19 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
• patients with unstable angina who are at high risk of subsequent MI or death
• patients with NSTEMI who are at high risk of subsequent MI or death.
7.8 Patients who are at high risk and for whom percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) is recommended but delayed beyond the initial medical management phase
receive a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) as an adjunct to PCI.
7.9 A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) is considered as an adjunct to PCI for all
patients with diabetes who are undergoing elective PCI or for those patients
undergoing complex procedures.
7.10 A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor is not used for patients who are undergoing procedurally
uncomplicated, elective single-vessel PCI, unless unexpected immediate
complications occur.
7.11 Local clinical audits on the care of patients with ACS also could include criteria on
other aspects of care referred to in the National Service Framework for Coronary
Heart Disease.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 20 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
8 Appraisal committee members
The appraisal committee is a standing advisory committee of NICE. Its members are
appointed for a 3-year term. The appraisal committee meets 3 times a month except in
December, when there are no meetings. The committee membership is split into
3 branches, with the chair, vice-chair and a number of other members between them
attending meetings of all branches. Each branch considers its own list of technologies and
ongoing topics are not moved between the branches.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each appraisal committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations interests, are posted on the NICE website.
The following is a list of the committee members who took part in the discussions for this
appraisal.
Dr Jane Adam
Radiologist, St George's Hospital, London
Professor R L Akehurst
Dean, School of Health-Related Research, Sheffield University
Dr Sunil Angris
General Practitioner, Waterhouses Medical Practice
Professor David Barnett (Chair)
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Leicester
Professor Sir Colin Berry
Professor of Morbid Anatomy, St Bartholomew's and Royal London's School of Medicine
Dr Sheila Bird
MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 21 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Professor Carol Black
Consultant Physician, Royal Free Hospital and UCL, London
Professor John Brazier
Health Economist, University of Sheffield
Professor Martin Buxton
Director of Health Economics Research Group, Brunel University
Professor Mike Campbell
Statistician, Institute of General Practice and Primary Care, Sheffield
Dr Karl Claxton
Health Economist, University of York
Professor Sarah Cowley
Professor of Community Practice Development, Kings College, London
Professor Jack Dowie
Health Economist, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London
Mr Chris Evennett
Chief Executive, Mid-Hampshire Primary Care Trust
Dr Paul Ewings
Statistician, Taunton and Somerset NHS Trust
Professor Terry Feest
Clinical Director and Consultant Nephrologist, Richard Bright Renal Unit, and Chairman of
the UK Renal Registry
Professor Gary A Ford
Professor of Pharmacology of Old Age, Consultant Physician, Wolfson Unit of Clinical
Pharmacology, University of Newcastle
Mrs Sue Gallagher
Chief Executive, Merton, Sutton and Wandsworth Health Authority
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 22 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Dr Trevor Gibbs
Head, Global Clinical Safety and Pharmacovigilance, GlaxoSmithKline
Sally Gooch
Director of Nursing, Mid-Essex Hospital Services Trust
Mr John Goulston
Director of Finance, The Royal Free Hampstead NHS Trust
Professor Trisha Greenhalgh
Professor of Primary Health Care, University College London
Miss Linda Hands
Consultant Vascular Surgeon, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
Professor Philip Home
Professor of Diabetes Medicine, University of Newcastle
Dr Terry John
General Practitioner, The Firs, London
Dr Diane Ketley
Research into Practice Programme Leader, NHS Modernisation Agency
Dr Mayur Lakhani
General Practitioner, Highgate Surgery, Leicester, and Lecturer, University of Leicester
Ruth Lesirge
Lay Representative; Director, Mental Health Foundation
Dr George Levvy
Lay Representative; Chief Executive, Motor Neurone Disease Association
Dr Gill Morgan
CEO, North and East Devon Health Authority
Professor Miranda Mugford
Health Economist, University of East Anglia
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 23 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Mr M Mughal
Consultant Surgeon, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
Mr James Partridge
Lay Representative; Chief Executive, Changing Faces
Siân Richards
General Manager, Cardiff Local Health Group
Professor Philip Routledge
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Wales
Dr Rhiannon Rowsell
Pharmaceutical Physician, AstraZeneca UK Ltd
Dr Stephen Saltissi
Consultant Cardiologist, Royal Liverpool University Hospital
Professor Andrew Stevens (Vice-Chairman)
Professor of Public Health, University of Birmingham
Professor Ray Tallis
Consultant Physician, Hope Hospital, Salford
Dr Cathryn Thomas
General Practitioner, and Senior Lecturer, Department of Primary Care and General
Practice, University of Birmingham
Professor Mary Watkins
Head of Institute of Health Studies, University of Plymouth
Dr Norman Waugh
Public Health Consultant, University of Southampton
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 24 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
9 Sources of evidence considered by the
committee
The following documentation and opinion were made available to the Committee:
• Assessment report prepared by NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination and
Centre for Health Economics:
－ A Systematic Review Update of the Clinical Effectiveness and Cost Effectiveness
of Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Antagonists and A Cost-effectiveness Model Comparing
Alternative Management Strategies for the Use of Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Antagonists
in Non-ST Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes
• Manufacturer or sponsor submissions from:
－ Lilly
－ Schering Plough
－ MSD
• Professional or specialist group submissions from:
－ British Cardiac Society and Royal College of Physicians (joint submission)
－ Royal College of General Practitioners
－ Department of Health and the Welsh Assembly Government
• Patient or carer group submissions from:
－ British Heart Foundation
• Expert perspective:
－ Dr J McLenachan, Dept of Cardiology, Leeds General Infirmary
－ Dr Charles Knight, Cardiology Dept, King George Hospital.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 25 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
10 Detail on criteria for audit of the use of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the
treatment of acute coronary syndromes
Possible objectives for the audit
An audit on the appropriateness of the use of glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors could be
carried out to ensure the following:
• Small-molecule GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors are provided as part of initial medical management
for patients with unstable angina or with NSTEMI who are at high risk of subsequent
myocardial infarction (MI) or death.
• A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) is provided as an adjunct for patients at high risk for
whom percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is recommended but delayed beyond
the initial medical management phase.
• A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) is considered as an adjunct to PCI for all patients
with diabetes who are undergoing elective PCI or for those patients undergoing
complex procedures.
• A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) is not provided for patients who are undergoing
procedurally uncomplicated, elective PCI.
Possible patients to be included in the audit
An audit on the first objective above could be carried out on all patients presenting with
unstable angina or NSTEMI over a suitable time period given the total number of patients
with these conditions treated in 6 months or 1 year. If clinical coding is reliable, the
patients can be identified through clinical or procedure codes. If clinical coding for these
conditions is not entirely reliable, it may be necessary to retrieve cases of patients who are
coded as unstable angina and those coded as myocardial infarction and screen these
cases to find patients with NSTEMI.
An audit on the other objectives could be carried out using all patients booked and on the
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 26 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
waiting list for PCI over a suitable time period given the total number of PCIs carried out in
6 months or 1 year.
Table 1 Measures that can be used as a basis for the audit
Criterion Standard Exception Definition of terms
Clinicians will have to agree locally how the
initial medical management phase is identified
for audit purposes.
A patient in any
High risk is of subsequent MI or death as
1 of the following
determined by clinician judgement based on
groups receives a
risk factors such as:
glycoprotein (GP)
IIb/IIIa inhibitor:
• clinical history (including age, previous
100% of myocardial infarction (MI), previous
• the patient has
patients percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
unstable
with or coronary artery bypass grafting [CABG])
angina and is
unstable
at high risk
None. • clinical signs, including continuing pain
angina or
despite initial treatment
• the patient has NSTEMI who
non-ST- are at high
• clinical investigations such as
segment- risk.
electrocardiogram (ECG) changes,
elevation
particularly dynamic or unstable patterns
myocardial
indicating myocardial ischaemia,
infarction
haemodynamic changes and raised cardiac
(NSTEMI) and
troponin level, if available at the
is at high risk.
appropriate time.
Clinicians will have to agree locally on how
high risk is documented for audit purposes.
In this approach, the audit involves finding the patients in the audit group who are at high
risk and determining if all those patients had a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor.
Another way to audit appropriateness of the use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors in initial medical
management is first to find patients in the audit group who have had small-molecule GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the initial medical management phase, then to screen those cases to
see if the patient was at high risk.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 27 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
The measures that could be used in an audit of appropriateness of the use of a GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor (abciximab) as an adjunct to PCI are as set out below.
Table 2 Measures on the appropriateness of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor as adjunct to PCI
Criterion Standard Exception Definition of terms
100% of patients
A glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa
who are at high
inhibitor (abciximab) is provided
risk and are
for the patient who is at high risk
scheduled for a See above for a
and is recommended for
PCI but the PCI is None. definition of high
percutaneous coronary
delayed beyond risk.
intervention (PCI) but the PCI is
the initial medical
delayed beyond the initial
management
medical management phase.
phase.
Clinicians will
have to agree
locally on what
A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) 100% of patients
constitutes
is considered for the patient who who have diabetes
None. evidence that
has diabetes and is undergoing and are undergoing
the treatment
an elective PCI. an elective PCI.
was considered
for audit
purposes.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 28 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Criterion Standard Exception Definition of terms
Examples of
complex
procedures =
multi-vessel PCI,
insertion of
multiple stents,
vein graft PCI,
100% of patients PCI for
A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab)
who are bifurcation
is considered for the patient who
undergoing a None. lesions
is undergoing a complex
complex Clinicians will
procedure.
procedure. have to agree
locally on what
constitutes
evidence that
the treatment
was considered
for audit
purposes.
100% of patients
A GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) An
who are
is not provided for a patient who unexpected
undergoing an
is undergoing a procedurally immediate –
uncomplicated
uncomplicated, routine elective complication
routine elective
PCI. occurs.
PCI.
Another way to audit the appropriateness of the use of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) as
an adjunct to PCI is to screen all patients scheduled for or who have undergone PCI to find
out whether, if a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab) was administered, the patient met the
criteria listed in the first 3 measures above.
Calculation of compliance with the measure
Compliance with each measure described in the table is calculated as follows:
Numerator divided by the denominator, multiplied by 100.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 29 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Numerator: Number of patients whose care is consistent with the criterion plus the
number of patients who meet any exception.
Denominator: Number of patients to whom the measure applies.
Clinicians should review the findings of measurement, identify if practice can be improved,
agree on a plan to achieve any desired improvement and repeat the measurement of
actual practice to confirm that the desired improvement is being achieved.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 30 ---
Guidance on the use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in the treatment of acute coronary
syndromes (TA47)
Update information
March 2010: This guidance was partially updated by NICE's guideline on acute coronary
syndromes.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-5633-3
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
