=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "guidance-on-the-use-of-drugs-for-early-thrombolysis-in-the-treatment-of-acute-myocardial-infarction-pdf-2294634226885.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:05.758906",
  "file_size_bytes": 157098,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/guidance-on-the-use-of-drugs-for-early-thrombolysis-in-the-treatment-of-acute-myocardial-infarction-pdf-2294634226885.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Guidance on the use of
drugs for early
thrombolysis in the
treatment of acute
myocardial infarction
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 30 October 2002
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta52
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 3 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Contents
1 Recommendations ................................................................................................................. 4
2 Clinical need and practice .................................................................................................... 5
3 The technology ..................................................................................................................... 7
3.1 Thrombolytic drugs ...................................................................................................................... 7
3.2 Delivering thrombolytic drugs .................................................................................................... 9
4 Evidence ................................................................................................................................ 11
4.1 Clinical effectiveness ................................................................................................................... 11
4.2 Cost effectiveness ....................................................................................................................... 16
4.3 Consideration of the evidence ................................................................................................... 20
5 Proposed recommendations for further research ............................................................. 23
6 Resource impact for the NHS .............................................................................................. 24
7 Implementation ...................................................................................................................... 25
8 Appraisal committee members ............................................................................................ 26
9 Sources of evidence considered by the committee .......................................................... 30
Update information .................................................................................................................. 32
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 4 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
1 Recommendations
This guidance provides recommendations on the selection of thrombolytic drugs in
patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Recommendations are made in relation to
the use of the drugs in hospital and pre-hospital settings. The guidance does not compare
hospital and pre-hospital models of delivering thrombolysis.
1.1 It is recommended that, in hospital, the choice of thrombolytic drug (alteplase,
reteplase, streptokinase or tenecteplase) should take account of:
• the likely balance of benefit and harm (for example, stroke) to which each of
the thrombolytic agents would expose the individual patient
• current UK clinical practice, in which it is accepted that patients who have
previously received streptokinase should not be treated with it again
• the hospital's arrangements for reducing delays in the administration of
thrombolysis.
1.2 Where pre-hospital delivery of thrombolytic drugs is considered a beneficial
approach as part of an emergency-care pathway for AMI (for example, because
of population geography or the accessibility of acute hospital facilities), the
practicalities of administering thrombolytic drugs in pre-hospital settings mean
that the bolus drugs (reteplase or tenecteplase) are recommended as the
preferred option.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 5 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
2 Clinical need and practice
2.1 Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is caused by blockage of a coronary artery by a
thrombus or clot. This is usually the result of rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque
within the artery. The heart muscle supplied by that artery is damaged or dies
because of lack of oxygen (ischaemia). Patients with AMI may develop heart
failure or potentially fatal cardiac arrhythmias as a result of damage to the heart
muscle. These and other complications may occur early, within the first few hours
of the event, or may develop over the subsequent months or years.
2.2 Around 240,000 people experience AMI in England and Wales each year. Up to
50% of people who have an AMI die within 30 days of the event, and over half of
these deaths occur before medical assistance arrives or the patient reaches
hospital.
2.3 Onset of AMI symptoms is usually rapid and the highest risk of death (usually as
the result of an acute fatal arrhythmia) is within the first hour of experiencing
symptoms – around one-third of all AMI deaths occur within the first hour.
2.4 Thrombolytic drugs break down the thrombus so that the blood flow to the heart
muscle can be restored to prevent further damage and assist healing. The sooner
the blood flow can be restored, the better the chances of avoiding the death of
the heart muscle. Along with clinical symptoms (typically but not exclusively
chest pain), characteristic changes in the 12-lead electrocardiogram (ST segment
elevation) provide the most immediate indication of the diagnosis of AMI for
patients requiring thrombolysis for AMI.
2.5 Intravenous thrombolytic therapy is an established standard treatment for AMI. It
is estimated that around 50,000 patients currently receive thrombolysis in
England and Wales each year. However, evidence suggests that thrombolysis
continues to be under-used.
2.6 Thrombolytic drugs are routinely given in hospital as soon as possible after a
confirmed diagnosis of AMI. Additionally, their administration in pre-hospital
settings, principally by ambulance paramedics, is becoming more common.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 6 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
2.7 Early primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) may be an alternative to
thrombolysis. Despite research evidence of the potential value of early PCI,
currently few hospital trusts have the capacity to provide it. Treatment delivering
thrombolytics in combination with glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors is also the
subject of research studies. However, these interventions are beyond the scope
of this appraisal.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 7 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
3 The technology
3.1 Thrombolytic drugs
3.1.1 In the UK, four thrombolytic agents are licensed and available to treat AMI. All act
by promoting the activity of circulating plasminogen. There is a long history of
use of one, streptokinase, whereas the other three, alteplase, reteplase and
tenecteplase, are newer options. Streptokinase is derived from streptococcal
bacteria. Streptokinase is given by intravenous (IV) infusion. Alteplase was
introduced in the late 1980s. It is essentially the same as the naturally occurring
activator of plasminogen in the human body, and is produced by recombinant
DNA technology. It is given by IV infusion. Reteplase and tenecteplase have been
introduced more recently (1997 and 2001, respectively). They are new modified
forms of plasminogen activator and can be given by rapid IV bolus injection,
rather than infusion.
3.1.2 The timing of administration is a crucial factor determining the extent of benefit
achieved by thrombolysis, and treatment should ideally be given as soon as
possible (normally up to 12 hours) after the onset of AMI symptoms.
3.1.3 Bleeding complications are the main risks associated with thrombolysis. The most
important bleeding complication is haemorrhagic stroke, which occurs in 0.5% to
1.0% of patients and is associated with high mortality and long-term disability in
survivors. Bleeding may occur at the injection site, in the gastrointestinal tract or
elsewhere. Hypotension may also occur. The risks and benefits of giving
thrombolysis need to be considered in individual patients and settings. The risk of
haemorrhagic stroke following thrombolysis increases with age and blood
pressure. Thrombolysis is contraindicated in individuals with bleeding disorders
or a history of recent haemorrhage, trauma, surgery or acute cerebrovascular
event. For full details of side effects and contraindications, see the Summary of
Product Characteristics for the individual agents.
3.1.4 Heparin (an anticoagulant) is given with all of the thrombolytic drugs except
streptokinase. It is usually administered as an IV bolus injection before
thrombolysis, followed by an IV infusion. When given with tenecteplase the
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 8 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
heparin dose is weight adjusted. Aspirin (an antiplatelet agent) is also usually
given with any thrombolytic drug, because it delivers a mortality benefit in its own
right.
3.1.5 Streptokinase (Streptase) is indicated up to 12 hours after onset of symptoms. It
is administered as an IV infusion over 1 hour. It has been extensively studied and
remains widely used. Streptokinase is associated with hypotension, infrequent
allergic reactions and, rarely, anaphylaxis. Patients treated with streptokinase
develop anti-streptococcal antibodies, which can inactivate the drug if
subsequent treatment is needed. Consequently in current UK practice, patients
are usually treated with streptokinase only once. It is estimated that around one-
third of people with AMI have contraindications to streptokinase. A recent survey
found that 82% of hospitals in England use streptokinase for eligible patients
experiencing their first AMI; other data suggest that streptokinase represents
between 53% and 65% of thrombolytic drug use. Streptokinase costs £80 to £90
per patient (excluding VAT; BNF 43, March 2002).
3.1.6 Alteplase (Actilyse, recombinant human tissue plasminogen activator, rtPA) can
be delivered in a standard or accelerated regimen. The accelerated regimen,
which is much more commonly used, is indicated up to 6 hours after symptom
onset and is delivered by an initial IV bolus injection, followed by two IV infusions,
the first given over 30 minutes and the second over 60 minutes. The standard
regimen is indicated between 6 and 12 hours after symptom onset and requires a
bolus injection followed by five infusions over 3 hours. Like the other newer
drugs, alteplase does not stimulate the production of antibodies, so it can be
used repeatedly. It is estimated that alteplase represents between 23% and 32%
of thrombolytic drug use in the UK. Alteplase costs £600 per patient (excluding
VAT; BNF 43, March 2002).
3.1.7 Reteplase (Rapilysin) is indicated up to 12 hours after symptom onset. It is given
as two IV bolus injections 30 minutes apart. It is estimated that reteplase
represents between 12% and 15% of thrombolytic drug use in the UK. Reteplase
costs £716 per patient (excluding VAT; BNF 43, March 2002).
3.1.8 Tenecteplase (Metalyse) is indicated up to 6 hours after symptom onset. It is
administered as a single (weight-adjusted) IV bolus injection. It is estimated that
tenecteplase currently accounts for around 1% of thrombolytic drug use in the
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 9 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
UK, the manufacturer indicates that the proportion is increasing. Tenecteplase
costs £700 to £770 per patient (excluding VAT; BNF 43, March 2002).
3.2 Delivering thrombolytic drugs
3.2.1 The National Service Framework (NSF) for coronary heart disease (CHD) in
England and Tackling CHD in Wales specify that eligible patients with AMI should
be given thrombolysis within 60 minutes of calling for professional help ('call-to-
needle' time) and should receive thrombolysis within 20 minutes of arriving at
hospital ('door-to-needle' time). It is also suggested that it may be appropriate to
provide pre-hospital thrombolysis where local 'call-to-hospital' times are likely to
be over 30 minutes. The NHS Plan in England gave a commitment to train and
equip ambulance paramedics to provide thrombolysis.
3.2.2 Direct admission to a coronary care unit (CCU) is often not possible, and A&E
departments are being encouraged to administer thrombolysis to reduce delays
in door-to-needle times. The potential for specialist nursing input in the delivery
of thrombolysis is being developed.
3.2.3 Given the benefits of early administration of thrombolysis on reducing damage to
heart muscle and consequently on long-term outcomes, pre-hospital
administration of thrombolysis by ambulance paramedics is being gradually
implemented in the NHS.
3.2.4 Currently, pre-hospital thrombolysis is administered by fewer than five
ambulance services and a small number of remote community hospitals in
England and Wales. Ongoing changes in infrastructure and training will be
required to implement the requirements of the NSF for CHD, Tackling CHD in
Wales and the NHS Plan to allow more widespread delivery in pre-hospital
settings.
3.2.5 Currently, streptokinase is the only thrombolytic that paramedics are authorised
to administer under the Prescription Only Medicines (Human Use) Order 1997.
However, paramedics can administer other thrombolytic drugs under local Patient
Group Directions, and guidelines on their use by paramedics have been
developed by the Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee (JRCALC).
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 10 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
3.2.6 There are practical difficulties in giving controlled-rate infusions in pre-hospital
settings, including drug preparation requirements, the practicalities of giving an
infusion in an ambulance and, for streptokinase, concerns about higher rates of
allergic reactions and hypotension, which are more difficult to manage away from
hospital.
3.2.7 Although they are not within the scope of this appraisal, a number of
organisational models of service delivery are relevant when considering the
feasibility of administering different thrombolytic agents and their effectiveness
in particular settings. These involve organisational, practical and operator issues.
In-hospital thrombolysis models include:
• assessment and treatment in A&E
• rapid assessment in A&E and transfer to CCU
• direct admission to CCU.
Pre-hospital models include:
• community hospital administration (nurse or general practitioner)
• general practitioner administration (at the point of contact)
• telemetry-supported paramedic administration
• autonomous paramedic administration.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 11 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
4 Evidence
The appraisal committee reviewed the evidence from a number of sources.
4.1 Clinical effectiveness
4.1.1 In-hospital thrombolysis
4.1.1.1 Fourteen randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing thrombolytic drugs were
included in the review. Overall the studies were considered to be of excellent
quality. In total, the trials involved over 142,000 patients, and 5 of the trials
included over 10,000 patients each. The trials had similar inclusion criteria in
terms of age (usually less than 70 or 75 years), ECG changes, duration of
symptoms, and presentation within 6 hours of symptom onset. Five of the trials
included between 12% and 26% of patients aged over 70 to 75 years. Women
were under-represented in all of the studies. Primary endpoints included 30-day
mortality, 90-minute artery patency/flow rates and left ventricular function.
Secondary endpoints included bleeding, stroke, congestive heart failure,
reinfarction, allergy and anaphylaxis. The results of the trials were also pooled in
a meta-analysis.
4.1.1.2 No direct trial comparisons between tenecteplase and streptokinase or between
tenecteplase and reteplase have been undertaken, and only cautious conclusions
can be drawn from the indirect comparisons that can be deduced from other
studies.
Streptokinase
4.1.1.3 Two placebo-controlled trials were instrumental in establishing the efficacy of
streptokinase in reducing mortality. The GISSI trial (published in 1986) included
11,712 patients, and the ISIS-2 trial (published in 1988) included 17,187 patients. In
the GISSI study, 21-day mortality was 10.7% in patients treated with streptokinase
and 13% in those treated with placebo. This represents a statistically significant
absolute reduction of 2.3% (risk ratio 0.81; 95% confidence ratio [CI] 0.72 to 0.9).
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 12 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
In the ISIS-2 study, vascular mortality at 5 weeks was 9.2% in patients treated
with streptokinase and 12% in those treated with placebo. This represents a
statistically significant absolute reduction of 2.8%. These benefits were
independent of those of early aspirin treatment.
Alteplase
4.1.1.4 A meta-analysis of 8 comparisons of standard alteplase with streptokinase found
no significant difference between the 2 drugs in terms of mortality up to 35 days
(odds ratio 1.0; 95% CI 0.94 to 1.06). A statistically significant difference in
reinfarction rates in favour of alteplase was found (odds ratio 0.86; 95% CI 0.77 to
0.95). However, alteplase was associated with a statistically significant higher
risk of stroke (odds ratio 1.37; 95% CI 1.16 to 1.62), due to a doubling in the risk of
haemorrhagic stroke (odds ratio 2.13; 95% CI 1.04 to 4.36). However,
streptokinase was associated with a statistically significant higher risk of major
bleeds (other than stroke) than alteplase (odds ratio 0.81; 95% CI 0.68 to 0.97).
The categorisation and reporting of major bleeding varied between the trials, so it
is difficult to judge the clinical significance of these findings.
4.1.1.5 The studies included in this meta-analysis used the standard alteplase
administration regimen, whereas the GUSTO-I trial used the accelerated regimen
and is the only trial to have demonstrated superiority between different
thrombolytic agents. The GUSTO-I trial included over 40,000 patients. It found an
odds ratio of 0.85 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.94) for 30-day mortality for accelerated
alteplase compared with streptokinase, and an absolute reduction in mortality at
30 days of 1.0% (6.3% versus 7.3%; 95% CI 0.4% to 1.6%) in favour of accelerated
alteplase. However, this benefit was balanced by a statistically significantly
higher incidence of haemorrhagic stroke (odds ratio 1.42; 95% CI 1.05 to 1.91).
Using a combined outcome measure of mortality and disabling stroke, the
absolute advantage of accelerated alteplase over streptokinase was lower (0.9%;
p=0.006). Rates of bleeds (moderate or worse), allergic reaction, anaphylaxis,
congestive heart failure, and sustained hypotension were statistically significantly
lower in the group treated with accelerated alteplase. A further meta-analysis of
9 comparisons of alteplase with streptokinase, including the findings of GUSTO-I
(or accelerated alteplase), found no significant difference between the 2 drugs in
terms of mortality up to 35 days (odds ratio 0.94; 95% CI 0.85 to 1.04).
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 13 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Reteplase
4.1.1.6 Reteplase has also been compared with streptokinase in a study involving 5,986
patients (the INJECT study). This study found an absolute difference of 0.5%
(95% CI -1.98% to 0.96%) in 35-day mortality in favour of reteplase (not
statistically significant). If it is accepted that a 1% difference in mortality is the
limit of equivalence in thrombolytic therapy, this suggests that it is unlikely that
reteplase is inferior to streptokinase. An alternative interpretation is that in terms
of overall effects on mortality and disabling stroke reteplase may be inferior to
streptokinase, as the trial also found a statistically significantly lower risk of
haemorrhagic stroke (odds ratio 2.1; 95% CI 1.02 to 4.31) in the streptokinase
group. However, the trial also found that the rates of heart failure (23.6% vs
26.3%, p<0.05) and allergic reactions (1.1% vs 1.8%, p<0.05) were statistically
significantly lower in the reteplase group.
4.1.1.7 Reteplase has also been compared with accelerated alteplase in 1 relatively small
(n=324) study that examined intermediate angiographic endpoints of coronary
vessel patency (RAPID-2), and 1 larger study that examined patient-focused
endpoints (GUSTO-III, n=15,059). GUSTO-III was designed to test the clinical
superiority of reteplase over accelerated alteplase, following the findings in
RAPID-2 of better coronary artery patency with reteplase. However, GUSTO-III
found no statistically significant difference between the 2 drugs, in terms of
survival or adverse effects. The mortality rate at 30 days was 7.5% in the
reteplase group and 7.2% in the accelerated alteplase group: an absolute risk
reduction of 0.23% in favour of accelerated alteplase (95% CI -1.10% to 0.66%).
Given the confidence limits, reteplase cannot be considered as equivalent to
accelerated alteplase.
Tenecteplase
4.1.1.8 ASSENT-2, an equivalence trial of over 16,000 patients compared tenecteplase
and accelerated alteplase. The study found that 30-day mortality was almost the
same in the tenecteplase group (6.2%) and the accelerated alteplase (6.2%)
group. The absolute difference of 0.03% in favour of accelerated alteplase was
not statistically significant (95% CI -0.55% to 0.61%). Given the confidence limits,
tenecteplase and accelerated alteplase can be considered equivalent in terms of
mortality. However, there was a small but statistically significant reduction in the
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 14 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
incidence of bleeding with tenecteplase (26.4% compared with 28.9% in the
accelerated alteplase group), resulting in fewer blood transfusions in the
tenecteplase group (4.3% of patients compared with 5.5% in the accelerated
alteplase group). Also, the rate of heart failure was statistically significantly lower
in the tenecteplase group than in the accelerated alteplase group (6.1% vs 7.0%,
p=0.026).
Subgroups
4.1.1.9 None of the trials discussed was designed to investigate clinical subgroups, such
as by age or site of infarct (anterior, inferior). It was concluded that there was no
convincing evidence of relative differences in the effectiveness of the available
drugs in subgroups. The greater absolute benefit found in patients with anterior
infarcts in GUSTO-I may simply be a reflection of the higher baseline risk in this
group. The greater relative benefit in patients aged under 75 years was not
reflected in their level of absolute risk reduction. None of the differences
between the subgroups appeared to be statistically significant by interaction.
Summary
4.1.1.10 In summary, given the evidence on clinical effectiveness, it can be concluded
that, in the hospital setting, in terms of mortality:
• standard alteplase is as effective as streptokinase
• reteplase is at least as effective as streptokinase, and
• tenecteplase is as effective as accelerated alteplase.
4.1.1.11 If accelerated alteplase is believed to be superior to streptokinase, then indirectly
tenecteplase would also be considered to be superior to streptokinase.
4.1.1.12 Conclusions regarding the equivalence of reteplase compared with accelerated
alteplase depend on the interpretation of GUSTO-III.
4.1.1.13 Furthermore, if reteplase is considered to be equivalent to accelerated alteplase,
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 15 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
then this indirectly implies that reteplase is as effective as tenecteplase.
4.1.1.14 Important differences in major adverse events between the thrombolytic agents
are also apparent. The newer drugs are associated with a higher risk of
haemorrhagic stroke compared with streptokinase, but there are no apparent
differences in the frequency of haemorrhagic stroke between accelerated
alteplase and reteplase (GUSTO-III), or between accelerated alteplase and
tenecteplase (ASSENT-2). However, compared with streptokinase, the newer
drugs may also be associated with a lower incidence of congestive heart failure.
In addition, allergic reactions are more common with streptokinase than with the
other drugs, and major bleeds (leading to transfusions) may also be more
common with streptokinase, although the evidence on this is not consistent
across the trials. There is also some evidence that tenecteplase may be
associated with lower rates of major bleeds and heart failure than accelerated
alteplase.
4.1.2 Pre-hospital thrombolysis
4.1.2.1 No RCTs were found comparing the different thrombolytic drugs in pre-hospital
settings.
4.1.2.2 However, 9 RCTs and a systematic review investigating the feasibility, safety and
efficacy of pre-hospital administration of thrombolysis compared with hospital
administration were considered in the context of the appraisal. A number of other
papers reporting non-randomised studies and audits of pre-hospital thrombolysis
were also considered in relation to practical and implementation issues.
4.1.2.3 The RCTs were small, except for one that included over 5,000 patients (EMIP).
They were undertaken in a mixture of urban and/or rural settings in Israel,
continental Europe, Canada, the USA, Northern Ireland, and Scotland. A variety of
thrombolytic drugs were studied – 4 studies used alteplase, 4 used
streptokinase-type drugs, and 1 used urokinase (which is not available in the UK).
Only the USA study (MITI) involved paramedics administering the thrombolytic
(after remote consultation with a physician). In all but 1 of the other studies, a
hospital physician attended the patient and administered the drug. In the rural
Scottish trial (GREAT) a general practitioner undertook assessment and
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 16 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
treatment.
4.1.2.4 The RCTs found that, on average, pre-hospital thrombolysis was administered 58
minutes earlier than hospital thrombolysis; the differences ranged from 33
minutes in the MITI study to 130 minutes in the GREAT study. Individually, the
trials failed to show statistically significant reductions in in-hospital mortality,
although findings in all of the studies favoured pre-hospital administration.
However, a meta-analysis of 6 of the trials found a statistically significant
absolute reduction in mortality of 1.6% (95% CI 0.2% to 3%), and a relative risk
reduction of 17% (95% CI 2% to 30%, p=0.03) favouring pre-hospital
administration of thrombolysis. This analysis is heavily influenced by the results
of the GREAT study (in which thrombolysis was administered by general
practitioners in rural Scotland) and therefore does not directly relate to the
potential for paramedic-based pre-hospital thrombolysis.
4.1.2.5 A number of observational studies examining pre-hospital thrombolysis were
considered, although these generally only provide further insight into feasibility
and safety. They include studies of administration of anistreplase (a
streptokinase-like drug that is no longer available in the UK) by paramedics or
general practitioners in a Dutch city, reteplase administered by ambulance-based
nurses in Sweden, reteplase administered by paramedics in the USA, anistreplase
administered in a rural Italian emergency room, and 2 reports of a small number
of cases of reteplase administered by paramedics with hospital telemetry support
in England.
4.2 Cost effectiveness
4.2.1 In-hospital thrombolysis
4.2.1.1 The assessment group's literature review found 8 published articles on the cost-
effectiveness of thrombolytic agents that met the inclusion criteria for the review
of cost effectiveness. All compared streptokinase and alteplase (standard and
accelerated) in a hospital setting. Three of the articles reported different aspects
of the same cost-effectiveness model. Most studies reported incremental costs
per life-year gained, and 3 also reported incremental cost per quality-adjusted
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 17 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
life year (QALY). Most of the studies were based on the effectiveness results of
GUSTO-I, in which data on resource use were collected only for USA centres.
Consequently, the analyses undertaken in Canada, Ireland and France had to
attempt to translate these to settings in other countries.
4.2.1.2 In general, the studies had the following limitations: costs and benefits were not
measured in the same populations; comparator treatments were often
inadequately described; and the derivation of utility values was inadequately
explained. None of the studies undertook costing at a patient level and, while in
general similar cost categories were included, only some of the studies included
the longer-term costs of stroke and heart failure. Some of the studies included
consideration of adverse events, including stroke, reinfarction, major bleeds,
anaphylaxis, and congestive heart failure.
4.2.1.3 The analyses undertaken following GUSTO-I, which found a survival advantage
for accelerated alteplase at 30 days, showed the drug to be cost effective
compared with streptokinase within the context of the clinical trial in the US
healthcare system. In all of the studies, sensitivity analyses found that
assumptions regarding mortality differences and costs were important, so any
conclusions drawn are heavily dependent on the interpretation of the
effectiveness findings of GUSTO-I.
4.2.1.4 In particular, the economic analysis undertaken in the USA alongside GUSTO-I
modelled lifetime costs and benefits, and reported an incremental cost per life-
year gained of $32,678 and an incremental cost per QALY of $36,402 for
accelerated alteplase compared with streptokinase. The subgroup analyses
found that accelerated alteplase became more cost effective in patients with
higher absolute mortality risk – for example, $13,410 per life-year gained in
patients older than 75 years with anterior myocardial infarction. However, the
analysis requires extremely cautious interpretation given a number of issues,
including uncertainties over the interpretation of GUSTO-I (in general and in
subgroups), application of US data on resource use, and the assumption that
costs did not differ significantly between treatment groups.
4.2.1.5 Overall, there is little relevant published evidence on the economics of
thrombolytics in a UK setting, and none examining the currently available bolus
drugs. However, 2 cost-effectiveness models were submitted by manufacturers.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 18 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
4.2.1.6 It is logical to assume that the earlier the administration the greater the reduction
in damage to the heart. However, while precise assumptions about the survival/
time-to-treatment curve affect the benefit results in any modelling, it is unlikely
that any one drug has a large advantage over any other with regard to timing of
administration.
4.2.1.7 The 2 manufacturers' models are similar in structure and scope, although they
differ in terms of method and level of detail. Roche's model examines costs up to
30 days, assumes all 4 drugs have equivalent efficacy, and has less detailed
costing. In contrast the Boehringer Ingelheim model includes costing up to 10
years, includes long-term costing for individual complications (such as
congestive heart failure and stroke), and incorporates differential survival and
complication outcomes for the drugs and more detailed estimation of utilities.
Both models incorporate a range of different assumptions regarding adverse
events. The models also incorporate adjustment for the timing of administration,
including time-savings in pre-hospital settings in which only bolus drugs are
compared.
4.2.1.8 The Roche model essentially represents a cost-minimisation analysis, and finds
reteplase slightly less costly than accelerated alteplase or tenecteplase in
hospital. The Boehringer Ingelheim model assumes better survival and a lower
incidence of post-infarct congestive heart failure (streptokinase 15.4%,
accelerated alteplase 13.5%, reteplase 13.5%, tenecteplase 11.8%) for
tenecteplase. These assumptions, together with 10-year discounted costs, lead
to a finding that tenecteplase dominates accelerated alteplase and reteplase in
hospital (that is, it is of lower cost and greater effectiveness).
4.2.1.9 The assessment group adjusted key parameters, tested sensitivities and
presented revised results using the manufacturers' models. The sensitivity
analysis examined the parameter values submitted by the manufacturers for the
following: 30-day mortality, strokes, major bleeds, reinfarctions and congestive
heart failure.
4.2.1.10 The assessment group used the adjusted models to compare the 3 newer drugs
with streptokinase. For each comparison, the additional benefit (using QALYs) of
the newer thrombolytic was small, while the additional cost was substantial. The
cost differences between the newer drugs are relatively small. The most reliable
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 19 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
finding is that streptokinase is by far the cheapest drug and although it is a little
less effective (in terms of discounted QALYs), it is the most cost effective.
4.2.1.11 Using the adjusted manufacturers' models, the incremental costs per QALY
reported for the 3 drugs compared with streptokinase were: accelerated
alteplase, £7,219 (adjusted Boehringer Ingelheim model) and £7,878 (adjusted
Roche model); reteplase, £7,893 and £10,247; and tenecteplase, £8,321 and
£9,509. However, these cost–utility rankings of the 3 drugs relative to
streptokinase are sensitive to changes in assumptions in the models, and so are
not conclusive.
4.2.2 Pre-hospital thrombolysis
4.2.2.1 No published articles examining the cost effectiveness of different thrombolytic
drugs in pre-hospital settings were found.
4.2.2.2 There is a published economic analysis of the GREAT study comparing cost
effectiveness of pre-hospital and in-hospital thrombolysis (that is, the cost
effectiveness of the different drugs), which found that pre-hospital delivery had
an incremental cost per life saved of £3,890. The sensitivity analysis found that
the cost per life saved could increase to £88,000. It should also be borne in mind
that the benefits found in the GREAT trial were larger than those found in other
studies, the economic analysis was not undertaken alongside the trial, the
interventions were not described in detail, and the model of rural Scottish general
practitioner care is unlikely to be applicable throughout the NHS in England and
Wales.
4.2.2.3 In the pre-hospital setting, Roche's model assumes that reteplase and
tenecteplase have equivalent efficacy and that reteplase is slightly cheaper. The
Boehringer Ingelheim model finds that tenecteplase dominates reteplase in pre-
hospital settings (that is, it has a lower cost and greater effectiveness).
4.2.2.4 Building on the conclusions about in-hospital cost effectiveness, and since the
general pre-hospital delivery costs for the 2 suitable bolus drugs (reteplase and
tenecteplase) would be the same, the relative cost effectiveness of the drugs in
pre-hospital settings is likely to be similar to that in hospital (assuming equal
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 20 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
effectiveness of both drugs in each setting). On this basis it was concluded that it
was not possible to distinguish between reteplase and tenecteplase on grounds
of cost effectiveness in pre-hospital settings.
4.3 Consideration of the evidence
4.3.1 In-hospital thrombolysis
4.3.1.1 The committee noted the debate over the applicability of the findings of GUSTO-I
beyond the North American centres (where most of the benefit of alteplase over
streptokinase was found). The committee considered that the efficacy of
accelerated alteplase should not be determined solely from the results of the
GUSTO-I trial.
4.3.1.2 Despite concerns over the interpretation of GUSTO-I, the committee concluded
that it was likely that the newer thrombolytic agents are more effective than
streptokinase in terms of 30-day mortality.
4.3.1.3 The committee was aware of the documented higher rates of stroke associated
with the newer agents and carefully considered the views of clinical experts on
this issue.
4.3.1.4 The committee considered that differences in the benefit of one thrombolytic
agent over another are less clear if the combination of mortality and stroke
endpoints are taken into account, particularly for subgroups at higher risk of
haemorrhagic stroke. Furthermore, when considering the combination of
mortality and stroke endpoints, it could be argued that the differences in overall
benefit are less clear, particularly for subgroups at higher risk of developing
haemorrhagic stroke.
4.3.1.5 In taking the view that the use of streptokinase is cost effective, the committee
concluded that, although the acquisition cost of each of the newer drugs is
substantially higher than that of streptokinase, the available economic evidence
demonstrates that the newer drugs have an acceptable incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio when compared with streptokinase.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 21 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
4.3.1.6 Given that streptokinase is associated with a lower risk of stroke and is a cost-
effective drug, the committee also considered it appropriate that all of the
available thrombolytic drugs should be considered as options for use in care
pathways for AMI. Local organisational and clinical policy considerations, such as
proximity of CCU facilities and A&E staffing, will also have an impact on decisions
regarding the appropriate use of each of the drugs in hospital.
4.3.1.7 Because the drugs will have different risk–benefit profiles for individual patients,
the committee concluded that the decision about which of the available drugs to
use should be made after balancing the likelihood of the benefits and risks (for
example, stroke) to which the different drugs would expose the individual.
4.3.1.8 The committee took into account the potential importance of the methods of
administration of the different thrombolytics and their effect on door-to-needle
times. However, the impact of this factor on reducing myocardial damage and
important clinical outcomes was very dependent on the overall pain-to-needle
time. Thus, a saving of a few minutes in the door-to-needle time was likely to
have a much greater impact on these endpoints where the pain-to-needle time
was 1 hour compared with the situation where the pain-to-needle time was 6
hours.
4.3.2 Pre-hospital thrombolysis
4.3.2.1 The committee noted that while there is observational evidence to support pre-
hospital thrombolysis, applying the results to the current NHS context is difficult,
in that a minority used currently available bolus drugs, most are not paramedic
based, and none was reliably generalisable to England and Wales.
4.3.2.2 In the absence of comparative evidence on thrombolytics in pre-hospital settings,
the committee considered that the findings of trials comparing different
thrombolytic drugs in hospital could still reasonably be applied to pre-hospital
settings, with consideration of the additional relevant factors including safety and
applicability examined in the pre-hospital studies outlined above.
4.3.2.3 On the basis of advice from experts that only the bolus drugs were appropriate
for pre-hospital administration given the practical difficulties explained in section
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 22 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
3.2.6, and given that no high-quality evidence was available to differentiate
reteplase and tenecteplase in terms of clinical effectiveness or cost effectiveness
in pre-hospital settings, the committee considered that either reteplase or
tenecteplase could be used in these settings, provided that the necessary
infrastructure and training is provided to fully establish an appropriate model of
pre-hospital thrombolytic administration.
4.3.2.4 Given the risks associated with thrombolytic drugs and the fact that pre-hospital
administration is an emerging practice in England and Wales, the committee
considered it important to ensure high-quality training and supervision of staff
involved in the administration of thrombolysis. It was also considered important
that clinicians and organisations delivering pre-hospital thrombolysis should
develop clear clinical protocols for the use of thrombolytic drugs, such as those
developed by the JRCALC, and adopt robust clinical governance arrangements to
monitor the use of and outcomes associated with these drugs.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 23 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
5 Proposed recommendations for further
research
5.1 In light of the ongoing introduction of pre-hospital thrombolysis, it is
recommended that opportunities for the evaluation of the administration of
thrombolytic drugs in pre-hospital settings are explored.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 24 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
6 Resource impact for the NHS
6.1 Using estimates of the total number of people receiving thrombolysis and the
mixture of thrombolytic drugs used, current annual spending on thrombolytic
drugs in England and Wales is estimated to be between £13 million and £26
million (drug costs alone, excluding VAT).
6.2 If, as is believed, the current need for thrombolysis is only partly met, and more
clinically eligible patients were to receive thrombolytic drugs, cost estimates
would be markedly higher.
6.3 It is difficult to predict the local impact of the guidance on the hospital
prescribing patterns of available thrombolytic drugs. Consequently, only
approximate estimates of the likely NHS resource impact of this guidance can be
made, based on possible patterns of hospital prescribing of the alternative
available drugs.
6.4 Assuming that the current overall level of thrombolytic therapy remains
unchanged, if streptokinase represented 20% of thrombolytic drugs prescribed,
alteplase 10%, and reteplase and teneteplase each accounted for 35%, then the
total annual spending on thrombolytic drugs in England and Wales would be
between £27 million and £45 million. If these levels were assumed to be 35%,
20% and 22.5% respectively, then the total would be between £22 million and
£36 million.
6.5 In addition, substantial costs are associated with the introduction of pre-hospital
thrombolysis. These include the costs of additional equipment, training, and
potentially longer ambulance time spent treating patients with AMI. Also, any
expansion of pre-hospital thrombolysis would result in a shift of drug costs from
acute hospital trusts to other services such as ambulance trusts or primary care
trusts and, potentially, result in an increase in total local spending on thrombolytic
drugs where bolus drugs were not widely used in hospital. Such costs are difficult
to estimate usefully on the basis of the information available to NICE at the time
of this appraisal.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 25 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
7 Implementation
7.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 90 days of its date of publication.
7.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
7.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has acute myocardial infarction and the healthcare professional
responsible for their care thinks that alteplase, reteplase, streptokinase or
tenecteplase are the right treatment, they should be available for use, in line with
NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 26 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
8 Appraisal committee members
The appraisal committee is a standing advisory committee of NICE. Its members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. The appraisal committee meets 3 times a
month except in December, when there are no meetings. The committee membership is
split into 3 branches, with the chair, vice-chair and a number of other members between
them attending meetings of all branches. Each branch considers its own list of
technologies and ongoing topics are not moved between the branches.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each appraisal committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations interests, are posted on the NICE website.
Dr Jane Adam
Radiologist, St. George's Hospital, London
Professor RL Akehurst
Dean, School of Health Related Research, Sheffield University
Dr Sunil Angris
General Practitioner, Waterhouses Medical Practice
Professor David Barnett (Chairman)
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Leicester
Dr Sheila Bird
MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge
Professor Carol Black
Consultant Physician, Royal Free Hospital & UCL, London
Professor John Brazier
Health Economist, University of Sheffield
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 27 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Professor Martin Buxton
Director of Health Economics Research Group, Brunel University
Professor Mike Campbell
Statistician, Institute of General Practice & Primary Care, Sheffield
Dr Karl Claxton
Health Economist, University of York
Professor Sarah Cowley
Professor of Community Practice Development, Kings College, London
Professor Jack Dowie
Health Economist, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London
Mr Chris Evennett
Chief Executive, Mid-Hampshire Primary Care Group
Dr Paul Ewings
Statistician, Taunton & Somerset NHS Trust
Professor Terry Feest
Clinical Director and Consultant Nephrologist, Richard Bright Renal Unit, and Chairman of
the UK Renal Registry
Professor Gary A Ford
Professor of Pharmacology of Old Age/ Consultant Physician, Newcastle upon Tyne
Hospitals NHS Trust
Mrs Sue Gallagher
Chief Executive, Merton, Sutton and Wandsworth Health Authority
Dr Trevor Gibbs
Head, Global Clinical Safety & Pharmacovigilance, GlaxoSmithKline
Sally Gooch
Director of Nursing, Mid-Essex Hospital Services Trust
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 28 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Mr John Goulston
Director of Finance, The Royal Free Hampstead NHS Trust
Professor Trisha Greenhalgh
Professor of Primary Health Care, University College London
Miss Linda Hands
Consultant Vascular Surgeon, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
Professor Philip Home
Professor of Diabetes Medicine, University of Newcastle
Dr Terry John
General Practitioner, The Firs, London
Dr Diane Ketley
Research into Practice Programme Leader, NHS Modernisation Agency
Dr Mayur Lakhani
General Practitioner, Highgate Surgery, Leicester, and Lecturer, University of Leicester
Ruth Lesirge
Lay Representative; Director, Mental Health Foundation
Dr George Levvy
Lay Representative; Chief Executive, Motor Neurone Disease Association
Dr Gill Morgan
CEO, North & East Devon Health Authority
Professor Miranda Mugford
Health Economist, University of East Anglia
Mr M Mughal
Consultant Surgeon, Chorley and South Ribble NHS Trust
Mr James Partridge
Lay Representative; Chief Executive, Changing Faces
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 29 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Siân Richards
General Manager, Cardiff Local Health Group
Professor Philip Routledge
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Wales College of Medicine
Dr Rhiannon Rowsell
Pharmaceutical Physician, AstraZeneca UK Ltd
Dr Stephen Saltissi
Consultant Cardiologist, Royal Liverpool University Hospital
Professor Andrew Stevens (Vice-chairman)
Professor of Public Health, University of Birmingham
Professor Ray Tallis
Consultant Physician, Hope Hospital, Salford
Dr Cathryn Thomas
General Practitioner, and Senior Lecturer, Department of Primary Care and General
Practice, University of Birmingham
Professor Mary Watkins
Head of Institute of Health Studies, University of Plymouth
Dr Norman Waugh
Public Health Consultant, University of Southampton
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 30 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
9 Sources of evidence considered by the
committee
The following documentation and opinion were made available to the committee:
Assessment report prepared by the Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group,
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Liverpool: Early
Thrombolysis for the Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction, April 2002.
Manufacturer or sponsor submissions:
• Aventis Behring
• Boehringer Ingelheim
• Roche
Professional or specialist and patient or carer group submissions:
• British Association for Immediate Care
• British Association for Nursing in Cardiac Care
• British Heart Foundation
• Faculty of Accident & Emergency Medicine and British Association of Accident and
Emergency Medicine
• Faculty of Pre-Hospital Care, Royal College of Surgeons, Edinburgh
• Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee and Ambulance Service
Association
• Primary Care Cardiovascular Society
• Royal College of Physicians and British Cardiac Society
• Warwickshire Health Authority
• Welsh Ambulance Services NHS Trust
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 31 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Expert perspectives:
• Professor Douglas Chamberlain, Chairman, Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison
Committee
• Mr Andrew Marsden, Consultant Medical Director, Scottish Ambulance Service
• Professor Richard Vincent, Consultant Cardiologist and Professor of Medicine, Trafford
Centre for Medical Research
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 31 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
--- Страница 32 ---
Guidance on the use of drugs for early thrombolysis in the treatment of acute myocardial
infarction (TA52)
Update information
Minor changes since publication
March 2014: Implementation section updated to clarify that thrombolytic drugs are
recommended as an option for treating acute myocardial infarction.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-5673-9
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 32 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 32
