=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "hypertension-in-adults-pdf-2098552495813.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:40.669273",
  "file_size_bytes": 133828,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/hypertension-in-adults-pdf-2098552495813.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Hypertension in adults
Quality standard
Published: 20 March 2013
Last updated: 1 September 2015
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs28

Hypertension in adults (QS28)

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
What the quality statement means for different audiences .............................................................. 16
Source guidance .................................................................................................................................... 16
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement ........................................................................... 17
Quality statement 6: Referral to a specialist for adults with resistant hypertension ........... 18
Quality statement .................................................................................................................................. 18
Rationale ................................................................................................................................................ 18
Quality measures ................................................................................................................................... 18
What the quality statement means for different audiences .............................................................. 19
Source guidance .................................................................................................................................... 19
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement ........................................................................... 19
Update information .................................................................................................................... 20
About this quality standard ....................................................................................................... 21
Resource impact .................................................................................................................................... 21
Diversity, equality and language .......................................................................................................... 22

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
This standard is based on NG136.
This standard should be read in conjunction with QS21, QS15, QS35, QS52, QS68,
QS92, QS93, QS100, QS99, QS2, QS6 and QS196.
Quality statements
Statement 1 Adults with suspected hypertension have ambulatory blood pressure
monitoring (ABPM) or home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM) to confirm a diagnosis of
hypertension.
Statement 2 Adults with newly diagnosed hypertension receive investigations for target
organ damage within 1 month of diagnosis.
Statement 3 This statement has been replaced by quality statements on primary and
secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease in NICE's quality standard for
cardiovascular disease risk assessment and lipid modification.
Statement 4 Adults with hypertension have a blood pressure target set that is appropriate
for their age and whether blood pressure is measured in clinic or by ambulatory or home
monitoring
Statement 5 Adults with hypertension have an annual review of risk factors for
cardiovascular disease.
Statement 6 Adults with resistant hypertension who are receiving 4 antihypertensive
drugs and whose blood pressure remains uncontrolled are referred for specialist
assessment.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 1: Diagnosis –
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
Quality statement
Adults with suspected hypertension have ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) or
home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM) to confirm a diagnosis of hypertension.
Rationale
ABPM is the most accurate method for confirming a diagnosis of hypertension, and its use
should reduce unnecessary treatment in adults who do not have true hypertension. ABPM
has also been shown to be superior to other methods of multiple blood pressure
measurement for predicting blood pressure-related clinical events. HBPM may be used if
ABPM is unsuitable or the person is unable to tolerate ABPM, for example, for adults with
particular learning or physical disabilities.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults with a new diagnosis of hypertension whose diagnosis has been
confirmed by ABPM or HBPM.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator whose diagnosis has been
confirmed by ABPM or HBPM.
Denominator – the number of adults with a new diagnosis of hypertension.
Data source: Data can be collected from information recorded on GP systems.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as general practices and community pharmacies) ensure that
systems are in place to offer ABPM and HBPM to confirm a diagnosis of hypertension.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs, practice nurses or community pharmacists) offer
ABPM or HBPM to confirm a diagnosis of hypertension.
Commissioners ensure that they commission services that offer ABPM and HBPM to
confirm a diagnosis of hypertension.
Adults with suspected hypertension (high blood pressure) have ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring (which involves wearing a blood pressure monitor during their normal
waking hours) or home blood pressure monitoring to confirm whether they have
hypertension.
Source guidance
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG136 (2019, updated
2023), recommendations 1.2.3 and 1.2.4
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Suspected hypertension
Clinic blood pressure between 140/90 mmHg and 180/120 mmHg without a confirmed
diagnosis of hypertension. [NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults, recommendation
1.2.3]
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM)
ABPM involves a cuff and bladder connected to electronic sensors that detect changes in
cuff pressure and allow blood pressure to be measured oscillometrically. Systolic and
diastolic pressure readings are deduced from the shape of oscillometric pressure changes
using an algorithm built into the measuring device. A patient's blood pressure can be

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
automatically measured at repeated intervals throughout the day and night while they
continue routine activities. Systolic and diastolic pressure can be plotted over time, with
most devices providing average day, night and 24-hour pressures. NICE recommends
recording a daytime average to confirm diagnosis. [NICE's 2011 full guideline on
hypertension in adults, section 5.7.3]
Home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM)
HBPM devices are oscillometric and measure blood pressure on the upper arm, the wrist
or the finger. Home monitoring potentially offers some similar benefits to ABPM. Frequent
measurement produces average values that may be more reproducible and reliable than
traditional clinic measurement. To confirm a diagnosis of hypertension, blood pressure
should be measured twice daily, ideally in the morning and evening and continued for at
least 4 days, ideally 7 days. For each blood pressure recording, 2 consecutive measures
should be taken at least 1 minute apart when seated. [NICE's 2011 full guideline on
hypertension in adults, section 5.7.3, and NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults,
recommendation 1.2.7]

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 2: Investigations for
target organ damage
Quality statement
Adults with newly diagnosed hypertension receive investigations for target organ damage
within 1 month of diagnosis.
Rationale
Assessment of target organ damage can alert the clinician to possible secondary causes
of hypertension, some of which are potentially life threatening and some may be amenable
to potentially curative interventions. It can also support the clinician to decide the
appropriate blood pressure threshold at which to consider drug therapy for the treatment
of hypertension.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults with newly diagnosed hypertension who receive all investigations for
target organ damage within 1 month of diagnosis.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator who receive all investigations for
target organ damage within 1 month of diagnosis.
Denominator – the number of adults with newly diagnosed hypertension.
Data source: Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare
professionals and provider organisations, for example, from patient records.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as general practices) ensure that systems are in place for adults
with newly diagnosed hypertension to receive all investigations for target organ damage
within 1 month of diagnosis.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs and practice nurses) carry out all investigations for
target organ damage for adults with newly diagnosed hypertension within 1 month of
diagnosis.
Commissioners ensure that they commission services that carry out all investigations for
target organ damage for adults with newly diagnosed hypertension within 1 month of
diagnosis.
Adults with newly diagnosed hypertension (high blood pressure) receive tests within
1 month of being diagnosed to check for any damage to organs such as their eyes, heart
or kidneys.
Source guidance
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG136 (2019, updated
2023), recommendations 1.2.5 and 1.3.3
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Investigations for target organ damage
For all adults with hypertension, healthcare professionals should offer to:
• test for the presence of protein in the urine by sending a urine sample for estimation of
the albumin:creatinine ratio and test for haematuria using a reagent strip
• take a blood sample to measure glycated haemoglobin, electrolytes, creatinine,
estimated glomerular filtration rate, serum total cholesterol and high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
• examine the fundi for the presence of hypertensive retinopathy
• arrange for a 12-lead electrocardiograph to be performed.
[NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults, recommendation 1.3.3]
Target organ damage
Damage to organs such as the heart, brain, kidneys and eyes. Examples are left ventricular
hypertrophy, chronic kidney disease, hypertensive retinopathy or increased urine
albumin:creatinine ratio. [NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults, terms used in this
guideline]

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 3: Statin therapy
Quality statement 3 has been replaced by quality statements on primary and secondary
prevention of cardiovascular disease in NICE's quality standard for cardiovascular risk
assessment and lipid modification.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 4: Blood pressure
targets
Quality statement
Adults with hypertension have a blood pressure target set that is appropriate for their age
and whether blood pressure is measured in clinic or by ambulatory or home monitoring.
Rationale
Hypertension is associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular events. Setting blood
pressure to recommended levels aims to promote primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease, and to lower the risk of cardiovascular events. The target depends
on the person's age (aged under 80 or 80 and over) and whether blood pressure is
measured in a clinic setting or by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) or home
blood pressure monitoring (HBPM).
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Outcome
a) The proportion of adults aged under 80 years with hypertension who have a blood
pressure below 140/90 mmHg, or below 135/85 mmHg if measured using ABPM or HBPM.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator who have a blood pressure below
140/90 mmHg, or below 135/85 mmHg if measured using ABPM or HBPM.
Denominator – the number of adults aged under 80 years with hypertension.
Data source:Quality and Outcomes Framework indicator HYP008 reports the percentage

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
of patients aged 79 years or under with hypertension in whom the last blood pressure
reading (measured in the preceding 12 months) is 140/90 mmHg or less (or equivalent
home blood pressure reading). CVD Prevent indicator CVDP002HYP reports the
percentage of patients aged 18 to 79 years with GP-recorded hypertension in whom the
last blood pressure reading within the preceding 12 months is equal to 140/90 mmHg or
less.
b) The proportion of adults aged 80 years and over with hypertension who have a blood
pressure below 150/90 mmHg, or below 145/85 mmHg if measured using ABPM or HBPM.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator who have a blood pressure below
150/90 mmHg, or below 145/85 mmHg if measured using ABPM or HBPM.
Denominator – the number of adults aged 80 years and over with hypertension.
Data source:Quality and Outcomes Framework indicator HYP009 reports the percentage
of patients aged 80 years or over with hypertension in whom the last blood pressure
reading (measured in the preceding 12 months) is 150/90 mmHg or less (or equivalent
home blood pressure reading). CVD Prevent indicator CVDP003HYP reports the
percentage of patients aged 80 years or over with GP-recorded hypertension in whom the
last blood pressure reading within the preceding 12 months is 150/90 mmHg or less.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as general practices) ensure that systems are in place for adults
with hypertension have a blood pressure target set that is appropriate for their age and
whether blood pressure is measured in clinic or by ambulatory or home monitoring.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs and practice nurses) ensure that adults with
hypertension have a blood pressure target set that is appropriate for their age and
whether blood pressure is measured in clinic or by ambulatory or home monitoring. They
should use clinical judgement when agreeing blood pressure targets with adults with frailty
or multimorbidity.
Commissioners ensure that they commission services that have arrangements for adults
with hypertension to have a blood pressure target set that is appropriate for their age and

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
whether the blood pressure is measured in clinic or by ambulatory or home monitoring.
Adults who have hypertension (high blood pressure) have a target clinic blood pressure)
that is appropriate for their age and whether blood pressure is measured in their GP
practice or clinic or by ambulatory or home monitoring.
Source guidance
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG136 (2019, updated
2023), recommendations 1.4.20 to 1.4.22
Equality and diversity considerations
Targets are based on evidence of safe practice. An adult aged 80 years or over with
diagnosed hypertension would not have a target clinic blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg if
their blood pressure was already treated to below this threshold. Healthcare professionals
should use clinical judgement when agreeing blood pressure targets with adults with frailty
or multimorbidity.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 5: Review of
cardiovascular disease risk factors
Quality statement
Adults with hypertension have an annual review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Rationale
Adult's blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk increases over time. A review of risk
factors for cardiovascular disease delivered as part of an annual review of care should
support identification of increased risk and provide an opportunity to address modifiable
risk factors.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults who have had hypertension for 12 months or longer who have had a
review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease within the past 12 months.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator who have had a review of risk
factors for cardiovascular disease within the past 12 months.
Denominator – the number of adults who have had hypertension for 12 months or longer
who do not have established cardiovascular disease.
Data source: Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare
professionals and provider organisations, for example, from patient records. CVD Prevent
indicator CVD004HYP reports the percentage of patients aged 18 and over with GP-

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
recorded hypertension who have had a blood pressure reading within the preceding
12 months. CVD Prevent indicator CVDP001SMOK reports the percentage of patients aged
18 and over with GP-recorded cardiovascular disease or risk factors (including
hypertension) who are GP-recorded current smokers or have no smoking status recorded,
whose notes record smoking status in the preceding 12 months. Quality and Outcomes
Framework indicator SMOK002 reports the percentage of patients with hypertension
whose notes record smoking status in the preceding 12 months. Quality and Outcomes
Framework indicators no longer in QOF (INLIQ) indicator CVD-PP02 reports the
percentage of patients diagnosed with hypertension (on or after 1 April 2009) who are
given lifestyle advice in the preceding 12 months for smoking cessation, safe alcohol
consumption and healthy diet.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as general practices) ensure that systems are in place to offer
adults with hypertension an annual review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs and practice nurses) offer adults with
hypertension an annual review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Commissioners ensure that they commission services that offer adults with hypertension
an annual review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease.
Adults with hypertension (high blood pressure) are offered a review of risk factors for
cardiovascular disease each year.
Source guidance
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG136 (2019, updated
2023), recommendation 1.4.24

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Annual review
An annual review to monitor blood pressure, provide adults with support and discuss their
lifestyle, symptoms and medication. [NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults,
recommendation 1.4.24]
Review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease
Review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease could include:
• smoking status
• alcohol consumption
• blood pressure
• body mass index or other measure of obesity
• full lipid profile
• diabetes status
• renal function
• transaminase level (alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase)
• thyroid-stimulating hormone in people with symptoms of underactive or overactive
thyroid.
[Adapted from NICE's guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction,
including lipid modification, recommendation 1.5.5]

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Quality statement 6: Referral to a
specialist for adults with resistant
hypertension
Quality statement
Adults with resistant hypertension who are receiving 4 antihypertensive drugs and whose
blood pressure remains uncontrolled are referred for specialist assessment.
Rationale
Adults with resistant hypertension will usually be at high risk of cardiovascular disease.
Specialist assessment and evaluation supports management of their condition.
Quality measures
The following measures can be used to assess the quality of care or service provision
specified in the statement. They are examples of how the statement can be measured,
and can be adapted and used flexibly.
Process
Proportion of adults with resistant hypertension who are receiving 4 antihypertensive
drugs and whose blood pressure remains uncontrolled who are referred for specialist
assessment.
Numerator – the number of adults in the denominator who are referred for specialist
assessment.
Denominator – the number of adults with resistant hypertension who are receiving
4 antihypertensive drugs and whose blood pressure remains uncontrolled.
Data source: Data can be collected from information recorded locally by healthcare

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
professionals and provider organisations, for example, from patient records.
What the quality statement means for different
audiences
Service providers (such as general practices) ensure that local arrangements are in place
for adults with resistant hypertension who are receiving 4 antihypertensive drugs and
whose blood pressure remains uncontrolled to be referred for specialist assessment.
Healthcare professionals (such as GPs) refer adults with resistant hypertension who are
receiving 4 antihypertensive drugs and whose blood pressure remains uncontrolled for
specialist assessment.
Commissioners ensure that they commission services that refer adults with resistant
hypertension who are receiving 4 antihypertensive drugs and whose blood pressure
remains uncontrolled for specialist assessment.
Adults with resistant hypertension (high blood pressure that is difficult to control) who
are receiving 4 antihypertensive drugs (drugs to treat high blood pressure) and whose
blood pressure is still high are referred for specialist assessment.
Source guidance
Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management. NICE guideline NG136 (2019, updated
2023), recommendations 1.4.46, 1.4.48 and 1.4.52
Definitions of terms used in this quality statement
Resistant hypertension
Hypertension that is not controlled in adults taking the optimal tolerated doses of an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker plus a
calcium-channel blocker and a thiazide-like diuretic. [NICE's guideline on hypertension in
adults, recommendation 1.4.46]

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
Update information
September 2015: This quality standard has been updated to ensure alignment with NICE's
quality standard for cardiovascular risk assessment and lipid modification published in
September 2015.
Statement 3 on statin therapy has been removed and replaced by statements in NICE's
quality standard for cardiovascular risk assessment and lipid modification that cover
primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Minor changes since publication
March 2024: Data sources have been reviewed and references to national data sources
added to measures in statements 1, 4 and 5. Statements 1 and 4 have been amended to
reflect the use of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and home blood pressure
monitoring. Structure measures have been removed.
December 2023: Changes have been made to align this quality standard with the updated
NICE guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid
modification. The definition for review of risk factors for cardiovascular disease has been
updated in statement 5.
May 2023: Changes have been made to align this quality standard with the updated NICE
guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk assessment and reduction, including lipid
modification. Source guidance references have been updated for a definition used in
quality statement 5.
March 2022: Changes have been made to align this quality standard with the updated
NICE guideline on hypertension in adults. Source guidance references have been updated
throughout.
August 2019: Changes have been made to align this quality standard with the updated
NICE guideline on hypertension in adults. Links, definitions and source guidance
references have been updated throughout.

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
About this quality standard
NICE quality standards describe high-priority areas for quality improvement in a defined
care or service area. Each standard consists of a prioritised set of specific, concise and
measurable statements. NICE quality standards draw on existing NICE or NICE-accredited
guidance that provides an underpinning, comprehensive set of recommendations, and are
designed to support the measurement of improvement.
Expected levels of achievement for quality measures are not specified. Quality standards
are intended to drive up the quality of care, and so achievement levels of 100% should be
aspired to (or 0% if the quality statement states that something should not be done).
However, this may not always be appropriate in practice. Taking account of safety, shared
decision-making, choice and professional judgement, desired levels of achievement should
be defined locally.
Information about how NICE quality standards are developed is available from the NICE
website.
See our webpage on quality standards advisory committees for details about our standing
committees. Information about the topic experts invited to join the standing members is
available from the webpage for this quality standard.
NICE has produced a quality standard service improvement template to help providers
make an initial assessment of their service compared with a selection of quality
statements. This tool is updated monthly to include new quality standards.
NICE guidance and quality standards apply in England and Wales. Decisions on how they
apply in Scotland and Northern Ireland are made by the Scottish government and Northern
Ireland Executive. NICE quality standards may include references to organisations or
people responsible for commissioning or providing care that may be relevant only to
England.
Resource impact
NICE quality standards should be achievable by local services. The potential resource
impact is considered by the quality standards advisory committee, drawing on resource

Hypertension in adults (QS28)
impact work for the source guidance. Organisations are encouraged to use the resource
impact tools for NICE's guideline on hypertension in adults to help estimate local costs.
Diversity, equality and language
Equality issues were considered during development and equality assessments for this
quality standard are available. Any specific issues identified during development of the
quality statements are highlighted in each statement.
Commissioners and providers should aim to achieve the quality standard in their local
context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations. Nothing in this
quality standard should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with
compliance with those duties.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-0092-3
Supporting organisations
Many organisations share NICE's commitment to quality improvement using evidence-
based guidance. The following supporting organisations have recognised the benefit of
the quality standard in improving care for patients, carers, service users and members of
the public. They have agreed to work with NICE to ensure that those commissioning or
providing services are made aware of and encouraged to use the quality standard.
• Arrhythmia Alliance
• Blood Pressure UK
• British and Irish Hypertension Society
• Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
