=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "icosapent-ethyl-with-statin-therapy-for-reducing-the-risk-of-cardiovascular-events-in-people-with-raised-triglycerides-pdf-82613251568581.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:06.025992",
  "file_size_bytes": 162212,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/icosapent-ethyl-with-statin-therapy-for-reducing-the-risk-of-cardiovascular-events-in-people-with-raised-triglycerides-pdf-82613251568581.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin
therapy for reducing the
risk of cardiovascular
events in people with
raised triglycerides
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 13 July 2022
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta805
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 3 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
Contents
1 Recommendations ................................................................................................................. 4
2 Information about icosapent ethyl ....................................................................................... 6
Marketing authorisation indication .................................................................................................... 6
Dosage in the marketing authorisation ............................................................................................. 6
Price ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
3 Committee discussion .......................................................................................................... 7
Treatment pathway and comparator ................................................................................................. 7
Population ............................................................................................................................................ 8
Clinical evidence ................................................................................................................................. 10
The economic model .......................................................................................................................... 15
Cost-effectiveness estimates ............................................................................................................ 20
Other factors ....................................................................................................................................... 21
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................... 22
4 Implementation ...................................................................................................................... 23
5 Appraisal committee members and NICE project team .................................................... 24
Appraisal committee members .......................................................................................................... 24
NICE project team ............................................................................................................................... 24
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 4 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
1 Recommendations
1.1 Icosapent ethyl is recommended as an option for reducing the risk of
cardiovascular events in adults. It is recommended if they have a high
risk of cardiovascular events and raised fasting triglycerides (1.7 mmol/
litre or above) and are taking statins, but only if they have:
• established cardiovascular disease (secondary prevention), defined as a
history of any of the following:
－ acute coronary syndrome (such as myocardial infarction or unstable angina
needing hospitalisation)
－ coronary or other arterial revascularisation procedures
－ coronary heart disease
－ ischaemic stroke
－ peripheral arterial disease, and
• low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels above 1.04 mmol/litre and
below or equal to 2.60 mmol/litre.
1.2 This recommendation is not intended to affect treatment with icosapent
ethyl that was started in the NHS before this guidance was published.
People having treatment outside this recommendation may continue
without change to the funding arrangements in place for them before this
guidance was published, until they and their NHS clinician consider it
appropriate to stop.
Why the committee made these recommendations
There are currently no treatment options to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in
people taking statins who have controlled levels of LDL-C but raised levels of triglycerides.
Icosapent ethyl is licensed for people taking statins who have raised triglycerides and a
high risk of cardiovascular events, and who have either:
• established cardiovascular disease (secondary prevention), or
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 5 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
• diabetes and at least one other cardiovascular risk factor (primary prevention).
Clinical trial evidence suggests that icosapent ethyl reduces the risk of cardiovascular
events, compared with placebo, in people with raised fasting triglycerides (1.7 mmol/litre or
above) who are taking statins. The trial only included people with LDL-C levels above 1.04
mmol/litre and below or equal to 2.60 mmol/litre.
The cost-effectiveness estimates for icosapent ethyl are uncertain. Icosapent ethyl is
unlikely to be cost effective for primary prevention, so it is not recommended for this. But
the most likely cost-effectiveness estimates for secondary prevention are within what
NICE normally considers an acceptable use of NHS resources. So, icosapent ethyl is
recommended for secondary prevention in people with LDL-C levels above 1.04 mmol/litre
and below or equal to 2.60 mmol/litre.
People must be taking a statin to have icosapent ethyl. People who cannot have statins are
not covered by icosapent ethyl's marketing authorisation, so NICE cannot make any
recommendations in this area.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 6 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
2 Information about icosapent ethyl
Marketing authorisation indication
2.1 Icosapent ethyl (Vazkepa, Amarin Corporation) is indicated 'to reduce the
risk of cardiovascular events in adult statin-treated patients at high
cardiovascular risk with elevated triglycerides (≥150 mg/dL [1.7mmol/l])
and:
• established cardiovascular disease, or
• diabetes, and at least on other cardiovascular risk factor'.
Dosage in the marketing authorisation
2.2 The dosage schedule is available in the summary of product
characteristics for icosapent ethyl.
Price
2.3 Icosapent ethyl costs £144.21 per pack of 120 capsules (excluding VAT;
company submission). Costs may vary in different settings because of
negotiated procurement discounts.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 7 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
3 Committee discussion
The appraisal committee considered evidence submitted by Amarin, a review of this
submission by the evidence review group (ERG), and responses from stakeholders. See
the committee papers for full details of the evidence.
Treatment pathway and comparator
People with elevated triglycerides who are having statins with or
without ezetimibe would welcome a treatment option
3.1 NHS England estimated that between 25% and 35% of people having
statin therapy have elevated triglycerides. The patient and clinical
experts explained there is an unmet need for this population. This is
because there are no pharmaceutical treatments for people at risk of
cardiovascular events who have elevated triglycerides despite having
statins with or without ezetimibe. They explained the aim of treatment
would be to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. The patient expert
commented that lifestyle changes, including diet and exercise, can help
to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. The patient expert noted the
importance of having treatment options because current ways of
reducing cardiovascular risk may not work for everyone. The committee
concluded that people with elevated triglycerides who are having statins
with or without ezetimibe would welcome a treatment option.
Statins with or without ezetimibe is an appropriate comparator
3.2 The marketing authorisation for icosapent ethyl says it should be used in
addition to statin therapy. The company submission, which was based on
the REDUCE-IT trial (see section 3.6), also noted people could have
ezetimibe in addition to statins. The clinical experts said that fibrates are
not used to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in people with
moderately elevated triglycerides. They explained that fibrates are used
by people with very high triglycerides to prevent pancreatitis, which is a
different indication. The clinical experts confirmed that there are no
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 8 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
treatments to reduce cardiovascular risk for people with elevated
triglycerides who have statins with or without ezetimibe. Therefore, the
committee agreed statins with or without ezetimibe was the appropriate
comparator.
Icosapent ethyl is likely to be used mostly in a primary care
setting
3.3 The company noted it expected icosapent ethyl to be used in a primary
care setting. The clinical experts commented that icosapent ethyl might
be used in secondary care but it would likely be used more in primary
care. The committee concluded icosapent ethyl would likely be used
mostly in a primary care setting.
Population
The population in the company's submission is narrower than the
marketing authorisation in terms of LDL-C levels and is
acceptable
3.4 Icosapent ethyl's marketing authorisation does not specify age or low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) thresholds (see section 2.1).
However, the company only provided evidence for icosapent ethyl from
the REDUCE-IT trial. This included people aged 45 and older who had
cardiovascular disease, and people aged 50 and older who had diabetes
and at least 1 other cardiovascular risk factor (see section 3.5). The trial
also only included people with LDL-C levels above 1.04 mmol/litre and
below or equal to 2.60 mmol/litre. A clinical expert noted that there are
people younger than 45 who have cardiovascular disease and elevated
fasting triglycerides in the NHS. They explained that many of these
people have South Asian family backgrounds. The ERG commented that
the treatment effect for icosapent ethyl varies by age, with a larger
benefit observed in people under 65 (hazard ratio [HR] 0.65, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.56 to 0.75) than in people aged 65 or older (HR
0.87, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.00). The company highlighted that these analyses
did not include adjusting for potential confounders or multiple
comparisons. The committee was aware that restricting by age may
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 9 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
result in an equalities issue because age is a protected characteristic.
The committee concluded that the company's submission for icosapent
ethyl was narrower than the marketing authorisation and it was
acceptable to use the LDL-C thresholds from REDUCE-IT. This would
ensure its recommendation was based on the available evidence.
It is appropriate to consider the effects of icosapent ethyl only for
the secondary prevention subgroup
3.5 In its original submission, the company provided evidence for 2 separate
risk groups from the REDUCE-IT trial: primary and secondary prevention.
The primary prevention group included people aged 50 and older with
type 1 or 2 diabetes and at least 1 additional cardiovascular risk factor.
People in the secondary prevention group were aged 45 and older with
established cardiovascular disease. The committee noted that NICE's
technology appraisal guidance on alirocumab (TA393), evolocumab
(TA394) and inclisiran (TA733) defined high risk of cardiovascular
disease as a history of any of the following:
• a previous cardiovascular event, including acute coronary syndrome (such as
myocardial infarction or unstable angina needing hospitalisation)
• previous coronary or other arterial revascularisation procedures
• coronary heart disease
• ischaemic stroke
• peripheral arterial disease.
In response to the first consultation, the company provided analyses that
focused only on the secondary prevention subgroup. The committee noted that
icosapent ethyl was unlikely to be cost effective in the primary prevention
subgroup, because the cost-effectiveness estimates presented at the first
committee meeting were substantially higher than the range normally
considered an acceptable use of NHS resources. It concluded that it was
appropriate to focus on the effects of icosapent ethyl for the secondary
prevention subgroup. This includes people with diabetes who have established
cardiovascular disease.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 10 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
Clinical evidence
The REDUCE-IT trial may not be generalisable to the NHS in
England
3.6 The company provided clinical evidence from REDUCE-IT, a randomised
trial comparing icosapent ethyl with a mineral oil placebo. The trial
included people who had statins with or without ezetimibe, fasting
triglyceride levels of 1.53 mmol/litre or more and below 5.64 mmol/litre,
and LDL-C levels of more than 1.04 mmol/litre to 2.60 mmol/litre. In the
trial, 8,179 people were randomised and 29% were in the primary
prevention group and 71% were in the secondary prevention group (see
section 3.5). The primary endpoint was time from randomisation to the
first occurrence of any component of the major adverse cardiovascular
event (MACE) composite outcome. This comprised cardiovascular death,
nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, coronary revascularisation
and unstable angina. The ERG noted that REDUCE-IT did not include any
people from the UK, which increases uncertainty around the
generalisability of the results to the NHS in England. A clinical expert
commented that the trial did not represent the ethnic diversity in
England, because some family backgrounds were underrepresented.
They noted that people with South Asian family backgrounds may benefit
more from icosapent ethyl. The company compared the baseline
characteristics of the secondary prevention subgroup with a similar
population from Steen et al. 2016. This was a retrospective study of
183,565 people with or without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
from The Health Improvement Network database in the UK. The company
noted that BMI and systolic blood pressure were similar between
REDUCE-IT and Steen et al. However, the ERG noted that there were
substantial differences between REDUCE-IT and Steen et al. that might
modify the treatment effect. The mean age was higher in Steen et al. and
the percentage of male patients was lower. There were also differences
in comorbidities. In response to consultation, the company highlighted
that the populations in England and REDUCE-IT had similar distributions
by ethnic group. The company also stated that in REDUCE-IT, there was
no interaction between the efficacy of icosapent ethyl in reducing the
risk of cardiovascular events according to ethnicity ('white' HR 0.77, 95%
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 11 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
CI 0.69 to 0.85, 'non-white' HR 0.60, 95% CI 0.43 to 0.83). It stated that
an advisory board of 9 UK clinical experts considered the trial data would
be generalisable to the UK population. The clinical adviser to NHS
England noted that several treatments available in the NHS, such as
SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists, were used by only a small
proportion of people in REDUCE-IT. The clinical adviser explained that
the change in treatment landscape in the NHS in England since the trial
began makes the generalisability of REDUCE-IT to current practice
uncertain. The company stated that the use of SGLT2 inhibitors and
GLP-1 agonists in the trial was consistent with clinical practice at the
time of the trial. It also noted that people who do not have diabetes
would not necessarily be able to have these treatments. The committee
concluded that REDUCE-IT may not fully represent NHS clinical practice,
which increases uncertainty around the generalisability of the results.
There is uncertainty in the trial results because icosapent ethyl's
mechanism of action is not fully understood
3.7 The company stated that icosapent ethyl's mechanism of action is not
fully understood. The company noted it appears to modulate the
atherosclerosis pathway by lipid and non-lipid effects. It explained the
primary lipid effect is to reduce triglyceride levels. It added that the non-
lipid effects may include localised anti-inflammatory effects, regulation of
lipid metabolism gene transcription, antithrombotic effects and plaque
reduction. The clinical experts also commented that the mechanism of
action is uncertain. They explained that the reduction in cardiovascular
risk observed in REDUCE-IT was larger than what would be expected
from a reduction in triglycerides alone. It was also larger than that
reported by an earlier trial (STRENGTH) of a drug with a similar
mechanism of action to icosapent ethyl (see section 3.8). In response to
consultation, the company stated that the mechanism of action is likely
multifactorial and that icosapent ethyl can positively alter the
development, progression and stabilisation of atherosclerotic plaque. It
stated that triglyceride reduction only played a minor role in the
reduction in the risk of cardiovascular events associated with icosapent
ethyl. The company also noted that other related technologies that have
been appraised by NICE, such as SGLT2 inhibitors, have uncertain
mechanisms of action. The committee concluded that the mechanism of
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 12 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
action for icosapent ethyl is not fully understood. This added uncertainty
to the trial's results because the difference in benefit compared with
STRENGTH had not been fully explained.
The treatment effect of icosapent ethyl is uncertain because of
the potential negative effect of mineral oil placebo in REDUCE-IT
3.8 The placebo group in REDUCE-IT had 4 g of light mineral oil per day.
Icosapent ethyl significantly reduced the first occurrence of the MACE
outcome in the secondary prevention subgroup compared with placebo
(HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.65 to 0.81). A professional group and the NHS
England clinical adviser expressed concerns about the REDUCE-IT
results, in part because of the use of mineral oil. They commented that
mineral oil may not be a true neutral oil and may have increased the risk
of cardiovascular events in the placebo group. This would exaggerate the
observed difference in cardiovascular events between the icosapent
ethyl and placebo groups. The professional group and NHS England
clinical adviser also commented that results of a similar trial, STRENGTH,
did not show the same magnitude of benefit as REDUCE-IT. STRENGTH
compared a combination of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic
acid (which is similar to, but not the same as, icosapent ethyl) with a corn
oil placebo. The ERG explained that a 2021 paper by Doi et al. comparing
REDUCE-IT with STRENGTH suggested the differences in results might
be partially explained by differences in placebo comparators. But the
ERG cautioned that there were other possible explanations, including
that corn oil could decrease the risk of MACE or that there were
underlying differences in patient characteristics between the trials. The
ERG highlighted a systematic review by Olshansky et al. 2020 that
concluded that it is likely that mineral oil at the quantities used as
placebos does not significantly affect the conclusion of REDUCE-IT.
However, the ERG noted that this systematic review had some limitations
and one of the co-authors was employed by the company. In response to
consultation, the company acknowledged that some parameters
associated with cardiovascular risk increased in the placebo group of
REDUCE-IT. However, it stated that it was uncertain if these changes
were because of the natural history of the disease, regression to the
mean, or negative effects of mineral oil. The company provided a
comparison of cardiovascular outcomes trials from 2003 to 2019. The
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 13 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
comparison found that 79% of studies reported increases in LDL-C after
statin stabilisation, similar to what was observed in the placebo group of
REDUCE-IT. In response to consultation the company also highlighted
that the drug in STRENGTH was different to icosapent ethyl because of
different proportions of docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic
acid. So, comparing the results from the 2 trials was not appropriate. The
experts explained that among cardiovascular disease researchers and
clinicians, there is an ongoing debate about mineral oil placebos and the
impact on trial outcomes. The committee concluded that the relative
effect of icosapent ethyl was uncertain because of the potential negative
effect of the mineral oil placebo.
It is appropriate to consider scenarios for an estimated possible
reduction in treatment effect from 1.5% to 3%
3.9 At the first meeting, the NHS England clinical adviser explained they
expected to see analyses with the magnitude of treatment effect
reduced by 7% to account for the estimated negative effect of mineral
oil. This estimate was based on the 2021 paper by Doi et al. comparing
the results of REDUCE-IT and STRENGTH. The committee was aware
that the company provided the analyses done by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in the US to the European Medicines Agency based
on the 3-point MACE outcome assuming that the potential negative
effect of mineral oil on MACE events was between 0.3% and 3%. The
committee also noted that the Doi et al. 2021 paper commented that
there was an unexplained additional 13% benefit in REDUCE-IT. In
response to the first consultation, the company provided scenarios with
the clinical effectiveness of icosapent ethyl reduced by 0.3%, 1%, 2% or
3% based on the analyses provided to the European Medicines Agency.
The company considered that the range of 7% to 13% was not plausible
because it was based on a single simulated Danish observational study.
A clinical expert commented that it was difficult to quantify the potential
negative effects of mineral oil and there was significant uncertainty. As
such, they could not state which percentage reduction in treatment
effect was more plausible. The committee was aware that the European
public assessment report on icosapent ethyl notes that a 10% putative
negative effect of mineral oil would be a worst-case scenario but likely
an overestimation. In response to the second consultation, the company
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 14 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
presented an analysis replicating a Cox regression model made by the
FDA to examine the effects of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and
LDL-C on the relative benefit of icosapent ethyl. It presented a
propensity score matched approach to the Cox regression analysis to
account for overlapping effects of the biomarkers. It also presented an
analysis exploring the relationship between on-treatment serum active
drug concentration and cardiovascular outcomes to explore the effects
on cardiovascular risk that are independent of serum eicosapentaenoic
acid levels. The company considers the results of these analyses to be
confidential so they cannot be reported here. On the basis of these
analyses, the company updated its base-case model to include a 1.5%
reduced treatment effect for icosapent ethyl. Considering the company's
analyses and the conclusion of the European Medicines Agency, the
committee concluded that it would be appropriate to consider scenarios
estimating a possible reduction in treatment effect from 1.5% to 3%.
Icosapent ethyl has manageable adverse events
3.10 In REDUCE-IT, similar proportions of people having icosapent ethyl
(81.8%) and placebo (81.3%) reported adverse events. The clinical
experts noted that icosapent ethyl appears to be generally well tolerated,
but they had some concerns around specific adverse events. In
REDUCE-IT, there were significant differences in the incidence of atrial
fibrillation (5.3% icosapent ethyl, 3.9% placebo), bleeding-related events
(11.8% icosapent ethyl, 9.9% placebo), constipation (5.4% icosapent
ethyl, 3.6% placebo) and peripheral oedema (6.5% icosapent ethyl, 5.0%
placebo). The committee noted that some fish oil products can be
associated with unpleasant burps that may affect adherence (icosapent
ethyl is derived from fish oil). The company stated that unpleasant burps
had very little impact on treatment adherence. The committee noted the
concerns about some adverse events, but concluded icosapent ethyl
was generally well tolerated with manageable adverse events.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 15 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
The economic model
The results from the company's model are uncertain
3.11 The company's model included 8 health states: cardiovascular event-
free, first event, post-first event, second event, post-second event, third
or more event, post-third or more event, and death. The events in the
model were based on the composite 5-point MACE outcome from
REDUCE-IT (see section 3.6). The health states were populated by fitting
parametric models to the Kaplan–Meier curves for first, second and third
plus cardiovascular events from REDUCE-IT using a partitioned survival
approach. The model used a 1-day cycle length and a lifetime horizon,
equivalent to 36 years. The company used baseline utility values from
the literature (Stevanovic et al. 2016 and O'Reilly et al. 2011) and health
state multipliers from NICE's guideline on cardiovascular disease: risk
assessment and reduction, including lipid modification. The ERG noted
several concerns with the model structure and that the company's
partitioned survival approach to estimate the probability of having a
cardiovascular event deviated from the modelling approach in related
NICE appraisals. In recent hypercholesterolaemia and mixed
dyslipidaemia appraisals, the economic models have often followed a
Markov approach and used specific cardiovascular event types as health
states. The ERG was concerned that the model structure assumed
independence of endpoints, meaning the probability of having a second
or third cardiovascular event was independent of the time of the previous
events. It commented that the company's model did not explicitly model
nonfatal cardiovascular events and used a 1-day cycle length. The
committee commented that it was unusual that the company's entire
model was based on REDUCE-IT, rather than applying the relative
treatment effect observed in the trial to a baseline risk estimated using
routine datasets. In response to consultation, the company explained
that its model was designed to align with REDUCE-IT, in which people
progressed through health states in a specific order. It also commented
that time from randomisation to a first, second or third plus event was
used so there were no issues with crossover of events during the trial
period. Beyond the trial period, the company noted that any extrapolation
curves that crossed were considered clinically implausible and
disregarded. The ERG considered that these comments were insufficient
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 16 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
justification for the model structure and uncertainty remains. The
company provided a comparison of the model-estimated survival and
mortality from REDUCE-IT. The committee noted that the model
appeared to overestimate mortality in both the placebo and icosapent
ethyl groups at 5 years. The committee concluded that the results of the
company's model were uncertain because of the model structure and the
discrepancy between model and trial outcomes.
Using the composite 5-point MACE outcome in the model
increases uncertainty
3.12 The company's model used the same composite MACE outcome as
REDUCE-IT (see section 3.6). The ERG was concerned that the
composite outcome could mask the treatment effect in relation to
individual cardiovascular events. The ERG highlighted that in the
intention to treat population, the hazard ratios for cardiovascular death
(HR 0.80, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.98) and death from any cause (HR 0.87,
95% CI 0.74 to 1.02) were larger than that for the composite 5-point
MACE (HR 0.75, 95% CI 0.68 to 0.83). The company noted that although
the composite outcome was used, the distribution of specific
cardiovascular events was applied in the model. The company explained
that the effect of icosapent ethyl on each specific event occurring as a
first, second or third plus event was taken into account. However, the
ERG commented that applying direct estimates of time to each event is
not necessarily equivalent to combining time to composite event with the
proportion of each event in the composite outcome. The clinical experts
commented that using a composite MACE outcome is common for large
clinical trials but one expert said that there was some debate about
whether all components of the MACE should be used. The committee
was concerned that the composite outcome might be double counting
risk. It noted that revascularisations accounted for most second and third
events (the exact values are considered confidential by the company and
cannot be reported here). It also noted that coronary revascularisation
could be an indicated procedure based on a preceding event, such as
myocardial infarction. At its first meeting, the committee requested
Kaplan–Meier curves and hazard ratios for each of the individual
cardiovascular events. In response to consultation the company provided
Kaplan–Meier curves and hazard ratios over time for each individual
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 17 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
event type in the composite outcome. The ERG commented that in the
Kaplan–Meier curves for cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial
infarction and nonfatal stroke, there appeared to be a lag in the
separation of icosapent ethyl and placebo curves at around 1 to 2 years.
This might mean the composite outcome biases the treatment effect in
favour of icosapent ethyl in the first 1 to 2 years of treatment. The ERG
also commented that when considering the hazard ratios over time, there
are some differences between the individual events and the composite.
The committee welcomed the additional information from the company
but concluded that using the composite outcome in the model increased
uncertainty.
It is implausible that there is no loss of treatment effect at
treatment discontinuation
3.13 The company's base case assumed that the treatment effect for
icosapent ethyl continued at the same level for the duration of the model
with no loss of treatment effect at discontinuation. The company
commented that similar technology appraisals did not include loss of
treatment effect, including TA393, TA394 and TA733. The company
provided an analysis of the treatment effect over time, which showed
that it did not decrease during the follow-up period of REDUCE-IT. The
clinical expert commented that given the absence of longer-term data it
is difficult to determine the appropriateness of an assumption of
treatment effect loss. However, the expert noted that related treatments
for cardiovascular disease, such as statins, have long-term effects. The
expert commented that the company's assumption of no loss of
treatment effect was likely reasonable. However, the committee was
concerned that treatment discontinuation was not linked to treatment
effect in the icosapent ethyl model. At its first meeting, the committee
noted that it would have preferred a method linking treatment effect and
discontinuation by changing the hazard ratio to 1 at an appropriate time
after people stopped icosapent ethyl. In response to consultation, the
company commented that the clinical efficacy curves accounted for
efficacy lost because of discontinuation because they are based on the
intention to treat population, which includes all patients in the icosapent
ethyl trial, regardless of treatment discontinuation. The committee
acknowledged this, but considered that if the proportion of patients
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 18 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
continuing treatment reduced over the model time horizon, it would
expect the average treatment effect to be lower than that captured in the
trial. The committee noted that in the recent related appraisal of
bempedoic acid with ezetimibe (TA694), the company's model assumed
results achieved at 12 weeks were maintained for the duration of the
model's time horizon, or until treatment was stopped. It recognised that
in TA393, the company had assumed 100% treatment continuation and
compliance over the entire time horizon. The committee noted that this
assumption likely would not be appropriate in this appraisal because
many people had discontinued treatment by the end of follow-up in
REDUCE-IT (the value is considered confidential by the company and
cannot be reported here). The company highlighted that follow-up was
longer in REDUCE-IT and so it would be expected that more people
would discontinue treatment. The committee noted that assumptions of
complete continuation and no loss of treatment effect were also used in
TA733. The committee commented that the icosapent ethyl appraisal
had different considerations to those previous appraisals. It considered
that there was large uncertainty around the assumption that the
treatment effect observed over the REDUCE-IT trial period would
continue for the entire modelled time horizon if more people discontinued
treatment over time. The committee concluded that it was implausible
that the treatment effect would not reduce at any point after
discontinuation.
It is plausible that the treatment effect may be lost after 10 years
if treatment is discontinued
3.14 The company's base case did not apply a loss of treatment effect.
However, the company did provide 2 scenarios assuming that once a
person discontinued treatment, after a period of either 10 or 20 years,
they would have equivalent clinical outcomes to people in the placebo
group. The company explained that because of the model structure,
when assuming that people who discontinue treatment follow the
efficacy of the placebo group, it was assuming that all events that were
avoided occur at discontinuation, which was not clinically plausible. The
committee agreed that the way in which the loss of treatment effect had
been modelled was potentially biased against icosapent ethyl. This was
mainly because it was implausible that all avoided events would occur at
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 19 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
treatment discontinuation, but also because the efficacy curves for
people staying on treatment included some people who had stopped
treatment in the trial. The ERG's base-case included the company's
scenario where people stopping icosapent ethyl would have the same
clinical efficacy as the placebo group after 10 years. For people
continuing treatment, the assumption was that the treatment effect
would remain constant over the model time horizon. The committee
acknowledged the limitations with the modelled scenarios but
considered it reasonable to accept the scenario in which people stopping
icosapent ethyl would lose treatment effect after 10 years and those
continuing would maintain the treatment effect. However, it
acknowledged that the true cost-effectiveness results would likely be
lower than in the scenarios presented, had the loss of treatment effect
been modelled more appropriately.
The company's model has uncertainties so the comparison with
the validation model is also uncertain
3.15 Because of the ERG's concerns with the company's model, the company
provided a microsimulation model for validation. The validation model
was originally developed for the US setting but was adapted to the UK
NHS setting by using the same costs, utilities and background mortality
as the company's model. The validation model also used cardiovascular
event data from REDUCE-IT. The company provided a comparison of its
model with the validation model. The validation model explicitly modelled
individual nonfatal cardiovascular events, had a cycle length of 6 months
and assumed people experienced a disutility associated with an acute
event for 18 months after an event, after which they experienced a post-
event utility. The company also provided a 30-year comparison of the
expected number of first, second and third events, people discontinuing
icosapent ethyl, and people alive in the company's and validation models.
It noted the models had different structures but produced similar clinical
estimates. The committee noted there were still uncertainties about the
company's model structure (see section 3.11) and how treatment effect
after discontinuation was modelled (see section 3.13). The ERG also
noted that it was unclear to what extent the validation model should be
used to inform decisions in the company's model. The committee
concluded that the company's model remained uncertain and therefore
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 20 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
the comparison with the validation model was uncertain.
Cost-effectiveness estimates
Because of the uncertainty an acceptable ICER is towards the
lower end of the range normally considered a cost-effective use
of NHS resources
3.16 NICE's guide to the methods of technology appraisal notes that above a
most plausible incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £20,000
per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained, judgements about the
acceptability of a technology as an effective use of NHS resources will
take into account the degree of certainty around the ICER. The
committee will be more cautious about recommending a technology if it
is less certain about the ICERs presented. Because of the high level of
uncertainty in the clinical and economic evidence, the committee agreed
that an acceptable ICER would be towards the lower end of the range
normally considered a cost-effective use of NHS resources (£20,000 to
£30,000 per QALY gained).
The most plausible ICER is between £21,750 and £24,821 per QALY
gained
3.17 After the second consultation, the company's base-case ICER for
icosapent ethyl compared with a stable dose of statins with or without
ezetimibe was £20,000 per QALY gained for the secondary prevention
group. The company's base case assumed no loss of treatment effect for
icosapent ethyl but did include a 1.5% treatment effect reduction to
account for the possible effects of the mineral oil placebo. The ERG's
base case included a loss of treatment effect for those discontinuing
after 10 years but did not include a reduction in treatment effect for the
mineral oil placebo. The ERG's base-case ICER was £21,062 per QALY
gained. The ERG presented scenario analyses including a 0%, 1.5%, 3% or
7% treatment effect reduction to adjust for the possible effect of mineral
oil. It also presented scenario analyses including a loss of treatment
effect on discontinuation after 5 or 10 years, or not at all. The committee
considered that the scenarios including a reduction of treatment effect of
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 21 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
1.5% and 3% (see section 3.9) and a loss of treatment effect on
discontinuation at 10 years (see section 3.14) were the most plausible
scenarios. However, it considered that the ICERs that included a loss of
treatment effect on discontinuation were likely too high, because of the
way this had been modelled. So, the committee also considered a
scenario with a 3% reduction in treatment effect and no loss of treatment
effect on discontinuation. Therefore, the committee considered that the
most plausible ICER was between £21,750 and £24,821 per QALY gained.
Other factors
The committee considered potential equality issues in its
decision making
3.18 A patient organisation and clinical expert raised several potential
equalities issues. They noted that people with Black, Asian and minority
ethnic family backgrounds are more likely to have elevated triglycerides.
The patient organisation also commented that people living in England's
most deprived areas are almost 4 times more likely to die prematurely
from cardiovascular disease than those in the least deprived. It also
explained that compared with the general population, people with severe
mental illness are more likely to develop and die from preventable
conditions, including cardiovascular disease. It also noted that people
with learning disabilities are at increased risk of developing
cardiovascular disease. The clinical expert noted that some religions
have restrictions on fish products. The committee considered these to be
important issues. The committee concluded that its recommendation for
icosapent ethyl would apply to all patients and that the recommendation
would not affect people protected by the equality legislation any
differently.
End of life criteria do not apply
3.19 NICE's advice about life-extending treatments for people with a short life
expectancy did not apply.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 22 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
The committee has not seen evidence of additional benefits that
are not captured in the cost-effectiveness analysis
3.20 The clinical experts noted that icosapent ethyl may be considered
innovative because it appears to work on a disease pathway that is not
fully understood. The committee concluded that it had not seen evidence
of additional benefits associated with icosapent ethyl over those already
included in the QALY calculations.
Conclusion
Icosapent ethyl is recommended for reducing the risk of
cardiovascular events in people with elevated triglycerides
3.21 The committee noted uncertainty in the clinical effectiveness evidence
for icosapent ethyl because of the mineral oil placebo in the REDUCE-IT
trial (see section 3.8). It also noted concerns about the generalisability of
the trial results to the NHS in England (see section 3.6). It was concerned
about the company's modelling approach (see section 3.11), including
how the treatment effect after discontinuation was modelled (see
section 3.13) and the composite outcome (see section 3.12).
Nevertheless, the most plausible ICER was towards the lower end of the
range of what NICE normally considers a cost-effective use of NHS
resources. Therefore, the committee recommended icosapent ethyl for
reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people with raised fasting
triglycerides (1.7 mmol/litre or more) who are having statins and have
established cardiovascular disease. Established cardiovascular disease is
defined in line with the definition of high-risk cardiovascular disease in
NICE's technology appraisal guidance on alirocumab, evolocumab and
inclisiran (see section 3.5). Icosapent ethyl is recommended for people
with LDL-C levels above 1.04 mmol/litre and below or equal to
2.60 mmol/litre, in line with the clinical evidence from REDUCE-IT (see
section 3.4).
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 23 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
4 Implementation
4.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(Constitution and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information
Centre (Functions) Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning
groups, NHS England and, with respect to their public health functions,
local authorities to comply with the recommendations in this appraisal
within 3 months of its date of publication.
4.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on
implementing NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE
technology appraisal recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or
other technology, the NHS in Wales must usually provide funding and
resources for it within 2 months of the first publication of the final
appraisal document.
4.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make
sure it is available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This
means that, if a patient has raised triglycerides and the doctor
responsible for their care thinks that icosapent ethyl is the right
treatment to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events, it should be
available for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
--- Страница 24 ---
Icosapent ethyl with statin therapy for reducing the risk of cardiovascular events in people
with raised triglycerides (TA805)
5 Appraisal committee members and
NICE project team
Appraisal committee members
The 4 technology appraisal committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. This
topic was considered by committee C.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each appraisal committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
Catie Parker and Kirsty Pitt
Technical leads
Alex Filby and Charlie Hewitt
Technical advisers
Louise Jafferally
Project manager
ISBN: 978-1-4731-4668-6
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 24
