=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "intravascular-lithotripsy-to-treat-calcified-coronary-arteries-during-percutaneous-coronary-intervention-pdf-1899878211915973.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:43.139895",
  "file_size_bytes": 68560,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/intravascular-lithotripsy-to-treat-calcified-coronary-arteries-during-percutaneous-coronary-intervention-pdf-1899878211915973.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat
calcified coronary arteries
during percutaneous coronary
intervention
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 5 February 2025
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg802
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 2 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat calcified coronary arteries during percutaneous coronary
intervention (IPG802)
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG673.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Use intravascular lithotripsy as an option to treat calcified coronary arteries
during percutaneous coronary intervention with standard arrangements in place
for clinical governance, consent and audit.
1.2 Clinicians should enter details about everyone having the procedure onto the
National Institute for Cardiovascular Outcomes Research (NICOR) database and
review local clinical outcomes.
Why the committee made these recommendations
There is good-quality evidence that this procedure is effective and safe. The evidence
shows that calcification is reduced and blood vessel diameter is increased after this
procedure, meaning a stent can be more easily inserted. People having this procedure
already have a high risk of cardiovascular complications, but there is no evidence that
intravascular lithotripsy increases this risk. This procedure is widely used and established
in clinical practice.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 3 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat calcified coronary arteries during percutaneous coronary
intervention (IPG802)
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Coronary artery calcification (intimal and medial calcifications) increases the
complexity of percutaneous treatment strategies in coronary interventions. It
contributes to:
• arterial wall stiffness
• suboptimal stent delivery and expansion
• in-stent restenosis
• high rates of stent thrombosis
• the need for subsequent target lesion revascularisation after endovascular
interventions.
Current treatments
2.2 Standard endovascular treatment options for modifying calcium or plaque during
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) include balloon angioplasty using
standard or high-pressure non-compliant balloons; cutting or scoring balloons;
and stenting with or without coronary atherectomy (such as rotational, orbital or
laser atherectomy). These treatments aim to allow optimal stent expansion and
achieve maximal luminal gain. But they may sometimes lead to localised wall
injury, balloon rupture or the risk of coronary vessel dissections or perforation.
Intravascular lithotripsy is another endovascular treatment option for PCI.
Unmet need
2.3 Addressing calcified coronary lesions during PCI presents a significant challenge.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 4 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat calcified coronary arteries during percutaneous coronary
intervention (IPG802)
Calcified plaques can hinder stent deployment and expansion, increasing the risk
of complications such as arterial dissection or inadequate stent expansion.
Existing options for managing heavily calcified coronary arteries during PCI such
as balloon angioplasty may not be effective in fracturing severe calcifications. By
using sonic waves to fracture calcium deposits, intravascular lithotripsy may be
an efficient approach to managing calcified coronary arteries and may lead to
better stent placement and improved patient outcomes.
The procedure
2.4 In this procedure, intravascular lithotripsy is administered to the calcified
coronary artery before the stent is placed during PCI.
2.5 A percutaneous guidewire is passed through a catheter inserted from the radial
or femoral artery into the coronary artery. Then, an intravascular lithotripsy
catheter with embedded emitters enclosed in an integrated angioplasty balloon is
passed and connected to an external generator with a cable. The catheter is
advanced to the target lesion guided by X-ray imaging of radio-opaque markers
on the catheter. The balloon is then inflated with a saline and contrast solution to
ensure contact with the vessel wall. The lithotripsy cycle is then started. For
every cycle, the catheter emits localised, high-energy, pulsatile, unfocused,
circumferential, sonic, pressure waves (lasting microseconds). These waves pass
through the inflated balloon into the wall of the coronary artery. As the waves
travel into the wall and the connective tissue, they disrupt calcium deposits (both
intimal and medial) by micro-fracturing the calcified lesions. The balloon is then
deflated to allow blood supply to return to the heart.
2.6 The cycle can be repeated until the lesion has expanded enough to allow optimal
stent placement or the total pulses available are used.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 5 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat calcified coronary arteries during percutaneous coronary
intervention (IPG802)
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 14 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included is based on about 8,300 people from 2 systematic reviews
and meta-analyses, 1 small randomised controlled trial, 2 pooled analyses of
prospective studies, 5 prospective studies, 2 retrospective cohort studies and
2 case reports. It is presented in the summary of key evidence section in the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of
the overview.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: improved quality of life, reduced major cardiovascular events
and coronary artery patency.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: potential risk of coronary rupture and myocardial infarction.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.5 The committee noted that:
• the incidence of coronary artery calcification in people having percutaneous
coronary intervention is increasing
• the importance of calcification is more recognised
• CT coronary angiography may show the presence of calcification so
intravascular lithotripsy can be planned beforehand if the percutaneous
coronary intervention is being done electively
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 6 ---
Intravascular lithotripsy to treat calcified coronary arteries during percutaneous coronary
intervention (IPG802)
• the number of procedures recorded in the National Institute for
Cardiovascular Outcomes Research (NICOR) database has increased rapidly
over the past few years.
3.6 The committee was informed that:
• there is more research being done on using intravascular lithotripsy for
eccentric calcified lesions
• this procedure may result in less distal embolisation than other procedures
used to manage calcification.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6786-5
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
