=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "intraoperative-fluorescence-angiography-for-the-evaluation-of-coronary-artery-bypass-graft-patency-pdf-52774468541125.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:46.997531",
  "file_size_bytes": 59624,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/intraoperative-fluorescence-angiography-for-the-evaluation-of-coronary-artery-bypass-graft-patency-pdf-52774468541125.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Intraoperative fluorescence
angiography for the evaluation
of coronary artery bypass graft
patency
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 27 October 2004
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg98
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.

Intraoperative fluorescence angiography for the evaluation of coronary artery bypass graft
patency (IPG98)
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on intraoperative fluorescence angiography suggests that the
procedure is safe enough for routine use in the evaluation of coronary artery
bypass graft patency.
1.2 There is limited evidence on the diagnostic utility (that is, the extent to which
knowledge of its results improves patients' outcomes) of this procedure, and
clinicians should therefore audit and review the clinical value of intraoperative
fluorescence angiography in all patients having the investigation. NICE may
review the procedure upon publication of further evidence.
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Coronary artery bypass grafting is one of the most common cardiac surgical
interventions. In this procedure, a section of vessel from another part of the body
is used to reroute (bypass) blood around a blocked coronary artery and improve
blood flow to the heart. Early blockage of the graft and poor blood flow may be a
significant cause of morbidity and mortality in patients who have undergone
coronary artery bypass grafting.

Intraoperative fluorescence angiography for the evaluation of coronary artery bypass graft
patency (IPG98)
2.1.2 Several techniques are used intraoperatively to assess graft patency. These
include digital palpation, electromagnetic flow measurement, Doppler studies,
and conventional and thermal coronary angiography techniques. A limitation with
many of the imaging techniques is that they provide poor resolution and definition
of the grafts.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Intraoperative fluorescence angiography allows confirmation of the location of
the coronary arteries and assessment of bypass graft function during coronary
artery bypass procedures. The intraoperative fluorescence imaging system
consists of a video camera and a laser diode that emits monochromatic light. The
camera, guided by a range-detector diode, is positioned a safe distance above
the heart. A small amount of indocyanine green (ICG) dye is then administered as
a central venous injection. This dye fluoresces when illuminated using laser
energy and the images are recorded digitally. Currently the technique is only
semiquantitative, in that it permits assessment of graft flow as 'excellent',
'satisfactory' or 'poor' – it cannot provide an exact measure of graft flow. The
penetrating depth of the laser beam is only around 1 mm, limiting the use of this
technique to certain grafts. For more details, see the overview.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 The evidence on efficacy is based on four case series studies, with three studies
reporting on clinically relevant results. In one study, intraoperative graft patency
was assessed in 200 patients: graft patency was confirmed in 192 patients
(96%), and the additional information provided by the procedure resulted in graft
revision of these eight patients. Similar results were reported in two other studies
with 1.4% (4 out of 290) to 3.7% (4 out of 107) of grafts revised after the
procedure. No other outcomes were reported. For more details, see the overview.
2.3.2 One Specialist Advisor considered there to be too little information available
regarding efficacy.

Intraoperative fluorescence angiography for the evaluation of coronary artery bypass graft
patency (IPG98)
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 Complications associated with this procedure appear to be uncommon. There
were no reports of adverse events associated with the use of the ICG dye in
evaluating the patency of coronary bypass grafts. Six additional papers were
identified that described complications following the administration of ICG dye for
indications other than coronary graft patency. Most of these were reports of
patients developing anaphylactoid reactions, with an incidence ranging from
0.02% to 0.3%. For more details, see the overview.
2.4.2 One Specialist Advisor stated that anaphylactic/allergic reactions might occur
very rarely as a result of this procedure.
3 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6227-3
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
