=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "ivabradine-for-treating-chronic-heart-failure-pdf-82600557030853.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:26.818068",
  "file_size_bytes": 204668,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/ivabradine-for-treating-chronic-heart-failure-pdf-82600557030853.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Ivabradine for treating
chronic heart failure
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 28 November 2012
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta267
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 3 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Contents
1 Recommendations ................................................................................................................. 4
2 The technology ...................................................................................................................... 5
3 The manufacturer's submission ........................................................................................... 6
Main SHIFT population ....................................................................................................................... 8
Population covered by the marketing authorisation ........................................................................ 9
Cost-effectiveness evidence ............................................................................................................. 14
4 Consideration of the evidence ............................................................................................. 22
Clinical effectiveness .......................................................................................................................... 22
Cost effectiveness .............................................................................................................................. 29
5 Implementation ...................................................................................................................... 33
6 Appraisal committee members, and NICE project team ................................................... 34
Appraisal committee members .......................................................................................................... 34
NICE project team ............................................................................................................................... 37
7 Sources of evidence considered by the committee .......................................................... 38
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 4 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
1 Recommendations
1.1 Ivabradine is recommended as an option for treating chronic heart failure for
people:
• with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 2 to 4 stable chronic heart
failure with systolic dysfunction and
• who are in sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 75 beats per minute (bpm) or
more and
• who are given ivabradine in combination with standard therapy including
beta-blocker therapy, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and
aldosterone antagonists, or when beta-blocker therapy is contraindicated or
not tolerated and
• with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% or less.
1.2 Ivabradine should only be initiated after a stabilisation period of 4 weeks on
optimised standard therapy with ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and aldosterone
antagonists.
1.3 Ivabradine should be initiated by a heart failure specialist with access to a
multidisciplinary heart failure team. Dose titration and monitoring should be
carried out by a heart failure specialist, or in primary care by either a GP with a
special interest in heart failure or a heart failure specialist nurse.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 5 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
2 The technology
2.1 Ivabradine (Procoralan, Servier Laboratories) is a heart-rate-lowering agent that
selectively and specifically inhibits the cardiac pacemaker If current, which
controls the spontaneous diastolic depolarisation in the sinus node that regulates
the heart rate. Ivabradine is 'indicated in chronic heart failure NYHA class 2 to 4
with systolic dysfunction, in patients in sinus rhythm and whose heart rate is
75 bpm or higher, in combination with standard therapy including beta-blocker
therapy or when beta-blocker therapy is contraindicated or not tolerated'.
Ivabradine is administered orally at a recommended starting dose of 5 mg twice
daily. This dose may be increased after 2 weeks of treatment to 7.5 mg twice
daily if the resting heart rate is above 60 bpm, or decreased to 2.5 mg (half of the
5 mg tablet) twice daily if the resting heart rate is below 50 bpm. For full details
of dosage see the summary of product characteristics.
2.2 The summary of product characteristics lists the following adverse reactions for
ivabradine: luminous phenomena (phosphenes), bradycardia, atrioventricular first
degree, ventricular extrasystoles, blurred vision, headache, dizziness and
uncontrolled blood pressure. For full details of adverse reactions and
contraindications, see the summary of product characteristics.
2.3 Ivabradine is available in 5 mg and 7.5 mg tablets at a net price of £40.17 per
56-tablet pack (excluding VAT; BNF edition 63). The manufacturer's submission
quoted an average monthly cost of £42.10 (excluding VAT) based on the
proportion of patients using 2.5 mg (7%) and either 5 mg or 7.5 mg (93%) in the
SHIFT study (see section 3.1). Costs may vary in different settings because of
negotiated procurement discounts.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 6 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
3 The manufacturer's submission
The appraisal committee considered evidence submitted by the manufacturer of
ivabradine and a review of this submission by the evidence review group (ERG).
3.1 The manufacturer conducted a systematic literature search and identified only
1 randomised controlled trial that assessed the effect of ivabradine in people with
heart failure, known as SHIFT (systolic heart failure treatment with the If inhibitor
ivabradine trial). SHIFT was an international, multicentre, randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial comparing ivabradine with placebo for the
treatment of moderate to severe heart failure and left ventricular systolic
dysfunction. The trial was carried out in 625 centres in 37 countries and lasted
from 12 to 36 months in the active double-blind treatment period, extended to a
maximum duration of 52 months. The clinical-effectiveness evidence presented
in the manufacturer's submission was based on this trial alone, but results were
also provided for the SHIFT patient-reported outcomes (SHIFT-PRO) study.
SHIFT-PRO was carried out to evaluate the effects of ivabradine compared with
placebo on health-related quality of life in a representative sample of the main
trial population.
3.2 Patients with symptomatic heart failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of
35% or lower who were in sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 70 bpm or more and
were receiving stable background treatment for heart failure were considered
eligible for participation in SHIFT. After screening, 6,505 patients were
randomised to receive either ivabradine or placebo in addition to ongoing optimal
therapy (standard care) for heart failure (as assessed by the investigator
responsible for the patient). All patients received 5 mg of ivabradine or matching
placebo twice daily at day 0. This dose was maintained, or increased to 7.5 mg
twice daily or reduced to 2.5 mg twice daily depending on resting heart rate and
tolerability. All analyses were based on intention to treat even though a total of
1,190 patients died, withdrew consent or were lost to follow-up.
3.3 The trial groups in SHIFT were well balanced in patient baseline characteristics.
The mean age was 60.4 years, 76% of the patients were men and mostly white.
Mean heart rate was 79.9 bpm and mean left ventricular ejection fraction was
29%. Heart failure was ischaemic in 68% of the patients and patients were equally
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 7 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
distributed between NYHA class 2, 3 or 4. Alcohol consumption and smoking
status were also similar between the trial groups, with less than 20% of the
patients being current smokers in both groups. The background therapies were
also similar in both arms (ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers: 91%;
diuretics: 84%; beta-blockers: 89%; aldosterone antagonists: 61% and cardiac
devices [implantable cardioverter defibrillators: 3% and cardiac resynchronisation
therapy: 1%]).
3.4 Subgroups were predefined in terms of age, sex, beta-blocker intake at
randomisation, primary cause of heart failure, NYHA class, presence of diabetes,
presence of hypertension and heart rate above and below the median of 77 bpm.
The manufacturer stated in its submission that another subgroup was identified
after the committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use recommended
identifying the heart rate threshold at which there is a statistically significant
mortality benefit. This subgroup consisted of people with a baseline heart rate of
75 bpm or more (n=4,150) and was identified post hoc. Data from this subgroup
were used to identify the population to be covered by the marketing
authorisation. The manufacturer's economic model was also based on this post
hoc subgroup. Other post hoc subgroups identified were based on age (75 years
or older and 70 years or older).
3.5 The baseline characteristics of the subgroup with a baseline heart rate of 75 bpm
or more (the population covered by the marketing authorisation) were similar to
the main trial population. The mean age for this subgroup was 59.6 years and, like
the main trial population, they were mostly men (77%) and mostly white. There
were no baseline differences between the treatment groups in this population
including mean heart rate (84.5 bpm) and distribution of NYHA class. The
background therapies received were also similar to the main trial population for
both treatment groups (ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers: 90%;
diuretics: 84%; beta-blockers: 88%; aldosterone antagonists: 62% and cardiac
devices).
3.6 The primary outcome in the SHIFT main trial population was a composite
endpoint of first event of cardiovascular death or hospital admission for
worsening heart failure. This was carried out using a survival analysis based on
time-to-first event estimated by the Kaplan–Meier method. Secondary and other
efficacy outcomes included mortality, hospital admission, change in heart rate,
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 8 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
change in NYHA class, change in global assessment of heart failure symptoms
and efficacy in patients aged 70 years or older (post hoc analysis in the main trial
population).
3.7 In the SHIFT-PRO study (n=5,038), which studied a subset of the main SHIFT
population, health-related quality of life was estimated using the EuroQol-5
dimensions (EQ-5D) questionnaire and 'Kansas City cardiomyopathy
questionnaire' (KCCQ). Analysis in this study was also performed according to the
same predefined subgroups specified in the main trial population, with the
exception of presence of diabetes and hypertension. An additional subgroup was
specified according to whether or not patients had received at least half the
target dose of beta-blockers at randomisation. The manufacturer's submission
noted that there were no relevant differences in baseline demographics and
disease characteristics among the main trial population, the population covered
by the marketing authorisation and the population in the SHIFT-PRO study.
Main SHIFT population
3.8 In the main trial population, the primary outcome of first event of cardiovascular
death or hospital admission for worsening heart failure was analysed using a Cox
proportional hazards model adjusted for beta-blocker intake at randomisation.
The hazard ratio (HR) estimate was 0.82; (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.75 to
0.90, p<0.0001), representing a statistically significant relative risk reduction of
18% for ivabradine compared with placebo. This composite endpoint was driven
more by the rate of hospital admission for worsening heart failure (HR 0.74; 95%
CI 0.66 to 0.83) than by the rate of cardiovascular death (HR 0.91; 95% CI 0.80 to
1.03) because people are often admitted to hospital before they die.
3.9 Further analysis was carried out by the manufacturer to assess the impact of
baseline beta-blocker dose on the efficacy of ivabradine in the main SHIFT
population. For the primary composite endpoint, the relative effects of ivabradine
compared with placebo for the 5 categories of beta-blocker intake were:
• HR 0.71; 95% CI 0.55 to 0.93, p=0.012 (no beta-blocker)
• HR 0.74; 95% CI 0.59 to 0.92, p=0.007 (less than 25% of target dose)
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 9 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
• HR 0.81; 95% CI 0.68 to 0.98, p=0.029 (25% or more but less than 50% of
target dose)
• HR 0.88; 95% CI 0.72 to 1.07, p=0.193 (50% or more but less than 100% of
target dose) and
• HR 0.99; 95% CI 0.79 to 1.24, p=0.913 (100% or more of target dose).
There were similar trends in efficacy for ivabradine compared with placebo
across the beta-blocker categories for the component outcomes of hospital
admission for worsening heart failure and cardiovascular death. The
manufacturer noted that this could be a result of lower doses of beta-
blockers being associated with higher heart rate because beta-blockers
primarily reduce heart rate. There were no statistically significant differences
across the beta-blocker categories. These findings suggest that the efficacy
of ivabradine is primarily driven by heart rate and not by beta-blocker dose.
Population covered by the marketing authorisation
3.10 In the subgroup with a baseline heart rate of 75 bpm or more, the incidence of
the primary composite endpoint was statistically significantly lower in the
ivabradine group than in the placebo group (26.6% and 32.8% respectively,
p<0.0001). The hazard ratio showed a clinically and statistically significant
reduction of 24% in the risk of the composite endpoint for ivabradine compared
with placebo (HR 0.76; 95% CI 0.68 to 0.85). This was in line with the predefined
subgroup analysis on median heart rate, which revealed that baseline heart rate
modified the treatment effect of ivabradine.
3.11 There was a statistically significant improvement in all secondary outcomes for
the population covered by the marketing authorisation, unlike for the main SHIFT
population in whom some of the secondary outcomes were not statistically
significant. There were statistically significant reductions in all mortality
outcomes in the ivabradine group compared with placebo as follows:
• cardiovascular death (HR 0.83; 95% CI 0.71 to 0.97, p=0.0166)
• heart failure death (HR 0.61; 95% CI 0.46 to 0.81, p=0.0006)
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 10 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
• all-cause death (HR 0.83; 95% CI 0.72 to 0.96, p=0.0109).
Results similarly favoured ivabradine compared with placebo for:
• hospital admission for cardiovascular problems (HR 0.79; 95% CI 0.71 to 0.88,
p<0.0001)
• worsening heart failure (HR 0.70; 95% CI 0.61 to 0.80, p<0.0001)
• hospital admission for any cause (HR 0.82; 95% CI 0.75 to 0.90, p<0.0001).
3.12 In the population covered by the marketing authorisation, heart rate decreased in
the ivabradine and placebo groups by 17.4 bpm and 5.7 bpm at day 28 and
14.5 bpm, and 5.8 bpm at the last visit respectively. The manufacturer noted that
the greater decrease in heart rate in the population covered by the marketing
authorisation was consistent with a higher mean baseline heart rate of 84 bpm in
this subgroup compared with 80 bpm in the main trial population. This was
confirmed to be in line with previous ivabradine trials, which showed that greater
reductions in heart rate are associated with higher resting heart rate. In this
subgroup there was a statistically significant improvement in NYHA class in the
ivabradine group compared with the placebo group.
3.13 Using the SHIFT-PRO study data, 3 types of quality-of-life analyses were
performed. The first (main analysis) used '0' as the last post-baseline value for
deceased patients, the second (an analysis of surviving patients) used the last
post-baseline value for deceased patients, and the third used the change from
baseline to month 12 from the main analysis. For the EQ-5D index score measure,
quality of life worsened from baseline to the last assessment in the ivabradine
group and the placebo group in the main analysis. However, there was an
improvement in quality of life from baseline to the last assessment for the
analysis of surviving patients in the 2 groups, with a greater improvement in the
ivabradine group. The quality-of-life improvement from baseline to month 12 in
both groups was higher in the ivabradine group. The manufacturer suggested
that this was because there were fewer deaths during the first 12 months than
during the whole study.
3.14 A mixed regression model was used to estimate quality of life using EQ-5D index
scores with UK population tariff values. This showed that quality of life improved
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 11 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
in the ivabradine group for the population covered by the marketing
authorisation. The KCCQ disease-specific measure was also used and it showed
a statistically significant difference of 2.6 (95% CI 0.7 to 4.5, p=0.008) for
ivabradine compared with placebo for the 12-month analysis, which was also
similar to the main analysis and the analysis of surviving patients.
3.15 The safety population (n=6,492 main trial cohort; n=4,141 population covered by
the marketing authorisation) was the population who received at least 1 dose of
any study treatment. The adverse events that occurred on treatment (between
the first study drug intake and last intake plus 2 days) were analysed in this
safety population. The following adverse events occurred more frequently with
ivabradine than with placebo in the population covered by the marketing
authorisation: symptomatic bradycardia (4.1% and 0.7% respectively), atrial
fibrillation (7.9% and 6.8% respectively) and phosphenes (2.8% and 0.5%
respectively). There were similar results for the main trial population. However,
other serious adverse events and fatal events were higher in the placebo group in
the 2 populations. The manufacturer noted that the tolerability of ivabradine was
not affected by baseline heart rate because there were no differences in the
adverse events leading to withdrawal between the main trial population and the
population covered by the marketing authorisation.
3.16 After a request from the ERG during the clarification stage, the manufacturer
provided the absolute numbers for the primary composite outcome and key
secondary outcomes for the subgroups of the population covered by the
marketing authorisation according to their beta-blocker category, age and NYHA
class (details of the analyses are in section 3.22). The manufacturer also provided
separate scenario analyses of the impact of using a regression model for NYHA
progression adjusted for patient baseline characteristics, using updated standard
care drug costs and different assumptions for modelling mortality. In addition, the
manufacturer provided details of the patients who experienced symptomatic
bradycardia and atrial fibrillation, and follow-up data on the reduction in heart
rate at various time points for the population covered by the marketing
authorisation.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 12 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Evidence review group comments – population covered by the
marketing authorisation
3.17 The ERG stated that the literature search conducted by the manufacturer was
appropriate, all relevant studies had been identified and that SHIFT, on which the
manufacturer's submission was based, was relevant to the decision problem in its
analysis. The ERG was satisfied that SHIFT was a well-designed randomised
controlled trial with a robust method of randomisation. However, it highlighted
that only 12 patients (0.2%) in the study were recruited from the UK, but noted
the manufacturer's comment about the difficulties gaining study approval in the
UK. The ERG also stated that the low UK patient numbers may have resulted from
the difficulty in identifying eligible patients if patients were attending heart failure
centres and had good titration of beta-blocker therapy. It also noted that the
population covered by the marketing authorisation was younger, included a
higher proportion of men and patients with more severe heart failure than a
typical UK heart failure patient population, but it recognised that the baseline
characteristics of the population covered by the marketing authorisation were
similar to those reported for other key heart failure studies. However, the ERG
considered that the results of SHIFT were robust and generalisable to a UK
population because there was evidence to suggest that the patients in the trial
received standard treatments.
3.18 The ERG noted that the clinical-effectiveness evidence for ivabradine was based
on a post hoc subgroup of patients with a resting heart rate of 75 bpm or more
without prior stratification based on resting heart rate, but in line with
ivabradine's marketing authorisation. Therefore, it considered that the evidence
presented should be interpreted with a level of caution because there is likely to
be an imbalance between the groups in terms of heart rate and potential
unknown confounders. However, the ERG acknowledged that the baseline
characteristics were well balanced between the treatment groups in the main trial
population and the population covered by the marketing authorisation.
3.19 The ERG was aware that only approximately 26% of the main trial population and
the population covered by the marketing authorisation were each treated with the
recommended target dose of beta-blocker, and 55.4% of the trial population
covered by the marketing authorisation were treated with 50% or more of the
recommended dose of beta-blocker despite the recommendations in the SHIFT
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 13 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
protocol. It was concerned that the patients who were not treated with the target
dose of beta-blocker may not have been optimally treated. The ERG also noted
the low use of cardiac devices in SHIFT and considered that this could have
resulted from the exclusion of patients with pacemakers from the trial.
3.20 The ERG noted that the greatest benefit of ivabradine compared with placebo
was in reducing heart failure deaths (HR 0.61; 95% CI 0.46 to 0.81, p=0.0006),
which supports the observation that the results were generally driven by the
cause-specific endpoints of hospital admission for heart failure and heart failure
deaths in both populations. The ERG noted that ivabradine was associated with
an improvement in NYHA class in the population covered by the marketing
authorisation at their last visit compared with their baseline classification and that
it had little impact on the proportion of patients with worsening NYHA
classification.
3.21 The ERG noted that treatment-related adverse events occurred more frequently
in the ivabradine group (17.8%) than in the placebo group (8.3%) in the main trial
population. It felt that this was likely to be the same for the population covered by
the marketing authorisation because the most common adverse events were the
same as in the main trial population. The ERG highlighted that the reported
adverse events (apart from inadequate blood pressure control) were similar to
those reported in the BEAUTIFUL trial (10,917 randomised patients), which
assessed the effects of ivabradine plus standard care in patients with coronary
artery disease and left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
3.22 The ERG carried out an exploratory analysis of the data provided by the
manufacturer after the clarification request on the primary and secondary
outcomes of the population covered by the marketing authorisation according to
their beta-blocker dosage at randomisation (that is, no beta-blocker, less than
25% of target beta-blocker dose, 25% or more but less than 50% of target beta-
blocker dose, 50% or more but less than 100% of target beta-blocker dose and
100% or more of target beta-blocker dose).The ERG highlighted that their
exploratory analyses suggest that there is uncertainty around the benefit of
ivabradine plus standard care for patients with a resting heart rate of 75 bpm or
more and who are receiving at least 25% of beta-blockers. The ERG also explored
the efficacy of ivabradine according to NYHA class and in patients aged 70 years
or older. It noted that the analysis in the NYHA class 4 subgroup was based on
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 14 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
small numbers, creating uncertainty about the benefit of ivabradine observed in
this subgroup. Because the input data used in the exploratory analyses were
marked as academic-in-confidence by the manufacturer, the results have also
been marked as confidential and so cannot be shown here. However, the ERG
emphasised that these analyses are speculative and based on subgroups of
subgroups and should be interpreted with caution.
Cost-effectiveness evidence
3.23 In a systematic review of the literature, the manufacturer did not identify any
study on the cost effectiveness of ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure. No
cost-effectiveness data were presented for the main SHIFT population, and so
the economic evaluation carried out by the manufacturer was based only on the
post hoc subgroup of patients from SHIFT with a baseline heart rate of 75 bpm or
more. The manufacturer stated that this subgroup reflected the marketing
authorisation for ivabradine; that is, people with chronic heart failure NYHA class
2 to 4 with systolic dysfunction, in sinus rhythm and whose heart rate is 75 bpm
or more, who are being treated with ivabradine in combination with standard
therapy including beta-blockers, or for whom beta-blockers are contraindicated
or not tolerated.
3.24 The manufacturer developed a Markov cohort model consisting of 2 states (alive
and dead). The difference in quality of life of patients was captured according to
NYHA class in the 'alive' state of the model without modelling the NYHA classes
as separate health states. The model has a lifetime time horizon consisting of
monthly cycles, includes a half-cycle correction, and both costs and benefits
were discounted at 3.5%. The analysis was performed from the perspective of
the NHS and personal social services. Standard care was modelled in line with
SHIFT because the use of heart failure medications in the trial was higher than
current standard care treatment patterns in the UK. The regression equations for
mortality, NYHA class distribution, hospital admission and quality of life used in
the analysis were based on data from the entire SHIFT cohort rather than
developing risk equations based solely on the population covered by the
marketing authorisation. This was to avoid breaking randomisation and reducing
the predictive power of the risk equations because of smaller sample size.
However, the risk equations for mortality, hospital admission and quality of life
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 15 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
were adjusted for baseline heart rate to predict estimates for the population
covered by the marketing authorisation with a heart rate of 75 bpm or more.
3.25 The manufacturer estimated the risk of non-cardiovascular death based on age-
adjusted and sex-adjusted UK national life table data from the Office for National
Statistics rather than SHIFT data because it provided a larger, UK-specific data
source. This risk was assumed to be the same across treatment groups and no
treatment effect was modelled for this endpoint. The risk of cardiovascular
mortality (both heart failure and other non-heart-failure cardiovascular death) for
the within-trial period was estimated using a Gompertz parametric survival
regression model based on the full SHIFT cohort in the base-case analysis.
Survival models based on exponential and Weibull parametric distributions, and
as Kaplan–Meier data were included as part of the sensitivity analyses. The
cardiovascular mortality risk equation was estimated adjusting for a series of
baseline patient characteristics (including age, sex, NYHA class, heart failure
duration, body mass index, medical history, baseline use of heart failure
medications) to generate different estimates of mortality. The Gompertz
distribution was also used to extrapolate cardiovascular mortality beyond the trial
period. Mortality was approximately 17% in the standard care group of SHIFT.
Because of the uncertainty generated by using a small proportion to extrapolate
mortality for the rest of the cohort, the manufacturer considered mortality data
from an external data source (CARE-HF data; Cleland 2010) in the sensitivity
analyses. The extrapolation assumed that 50% of the cohort would have died
after 2,000 days (65 months).
3.26 The distribution of patients in each NYHA class over time was estimated from a
generalised ordered regression (a proportional odds model) developed from
SHIFT data. It predicted the distribution of NYHA class adjusting for treatment
and time covariates but not patient baseline characteristics. By the third year the
proportion of patients in class 3 and 4 reduced from 40.2% to 36.9% in the
ivabradine arm and from 44% to 40.6% in the standard care arm, whereas those
in class 2 increased from 58.4% to 61.4% and from 54.9% to 58.1% in the
ivabradine arm and standard care arm respectively. Because of the lack of any
evidence to predict the distribution of patients by NYHA class beyond the trial
period, the model assumed that the proportions remained fixed after the trial
based on the last observation in the trial at 29 months (although the absolute
numbers in each category were expected to vary according to the number of
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 16 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
patients alive).
3.27 The rate of heart failure, cardiovascular and all-cause hospital admission per
person month was estimated using a Poisson regression model based on the
entire SHIFT cohort and converted into a monthly transition probability in the
economic model. The hospital admission endpoints were modelled separately to
capture the appropriate resource use for each admission type and to permit
sensitivity analysis on the treatment effect of ivabradine. However, the base-case
analysis was based on all-cause hospital admission. Admission to hospital after
the trial was modelled to be equivalent to the within-trial period and assumed to
occur at a constant rate throughout the model irrespective of the ageing
population.
3.28 The treatment effect of ivabradine on cardiovascular mortality (including heart
failure death) compared with placebo was estimated as a hazard ratio of 0.90
(95% CI 0.80 to 1.03) from the parametric model to the underlying mortality risk in
the standard care group. It was assumed that the treatment effect of ivabradine
continues after the trial and is equivalent to that seen in SHIFT. To support this
assumption, the manufacturer highlighted that the heart-rate-lowering effect of
ivabradine was shown to be maintained throughout SHIFT and also over a 7-year
study period for ivabradine in patients with angina. The treatment effect of
ivabradine on the rate of admissions to hospital was estimated using a rate ratio
of 0.83 (95% CI 0.78 to 0.93) derived from the Poisson regression model. The
treatment effect was modelled on all-cause admission because cardiovascular
and heart failure admissions were assumed to be implicitly captured in all-cause
admission and ivabradine was shown to have a statistically significant effect on
all-cause admission in the main trial and populations covered by the marketing
authorisation. The length of stay associated with hospital admission was
estimated using external data based on expert clinical advice. In the base-case
model, the average length of stay was varied according to diagnosis on hospital
admission (heart failure: 7.57 days, other cardiovascular: 3.97 days and non-
cardiovascular: 5.13 days) and was based on a weighted average of elective and
non-elective NHS reference cost data.
3.29 The utility values used in the model were derived from the SHIFT-PRO study, in
which health-related quality of life was captured with the EQ-5D questionnaire.
EQ-5D index scores were calculated using UK population tariff values and then
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 17 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
analysed using a mixed regression model. Quality of life was modelled to reflect
patients' baseline characteristics, severity of the disease over time by NYHA
class, rate of hospital admission (which includes serious adverse events) and
treatment group. The resulting utility scores by NYHA class without any hospital
admission ranged from 0.82 in class 1 to 0.46 in class 4. Decrease in quality of life
because of hospital admission was estimated as decreases in utility of 0.07, 0.03,
0.08 and 0.21 for NYHA class 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. The effect of ivabradine
on quality of life was modelled and showed a small utility increase in the
ivabradine group compared with the baseline estimates used for the placebo
(standard care) group. Treatment-related adverse events were assumed not to
have any measurable impact on quality of life and the manufacturer indicated that
they had been captured by the treatment covariate in the regression model.
Quality of life was assumed to remain the same for each NYHA class in the post-
trial period and in the base case and the model estimates were not based on an
ageing population. This implies that the utility values for the patients in later
cycles were higher than they should be and this was assumed to have favoured
ivabradine because additional survival time was associated with greater quality-
adjusted life year (QALY) benefits. In the sensitivity analysis, quality of life was
adjusted for the increasing age of the modelled cohort by resetting the baseline
age for each cycle.
3.30 The average monthly cost of ivabradine (£42.10; excluding VAT) used in the
model was estimated according to the proportion of patients who received
2.5 mg (7%) and either 5 mg or 7.5 mg (93%) in the SHIFT study. The 5 mg and
7.5 mg tablets cost £40.17 per 56-tablet pack (excluding VAT; BNF 63), and the
price of the 2.5 mg dose was assumed to be half the price of the 5 mg tablet.
Average monthly standard care costs (£9.54) were estimated according to the
proportion of patients using each standard care medication in SHIFT. The unit
costs of the standard care drugs used such as beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors,
diuretics, aldosterone antagonists, angiotensin receptor blockers and cardiac
glycosides were also taken from the BNF. The manufacturer assumed that there
were no extra costs in administering ivabradine and the standard care drugs.
However, additional costs were included for ivabradine therapy titration
(1 specialist visit) and an electrocardiogram (ECG). This increased the total
monthly cost in the ivabradine group from £52 to £202 for the first month.
3.31 The hospital admission costs used in the model were estimated using the NHS
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 18 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
reference costs for heart failure admissions (general ward: £2,308 and cardiac
ward: £3,295), cardiovascular admissions (general ward: £1,942 and cardiac
ward: £1,730) and non-cardiovascular admissions (general ward: £2,644). It was
assumed that there was an equal probability of being in a general ward or a
cardiac ward. Serious adverse events were captured using these hospital
admission endpoints, but non-serious adverse events were not included. The
monthly cost of managing heart failure, including physician visits, outpatient
procedures and diagnostic tests, was estimated to be £27 from British Heart
Foundation statistics.
3.32 The base-case results of the economic analysis, which was based on the
population covered by the marketing authorisation, was estimated by applying
individual patient profiles from SHIFT to the risk equations sequentially, 1 at a
time. It showed that the incremental costs and incremental QALYs gained from
treating chronic heart failure with ivabradine plus standard care compared with
standard care alone were £2,376 and 0.28 QALYs respectively. This gave an
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £8,498 per QALY gained.
3.33 The manufacturer highlighted that the deterministic, probabilistic and structural
sensitivity analyses were performed using average covariate values in the
regression equations to shorten analysis time and that this may have caused
some loss in accuracy in the ICER estimates. The base-case ICER using this
method was £7,743 per QALY gained. The one-way deterministic sensitivity
analyses were performed on several model parameters using their 95%
confidence intervals. The cost-effectiveness result was most sensitive to
changes in cardiovascular mortality risk, with the resulting ICERs ranging from
£5,655 to £40,638 per QALY gained. The base-case ICER also showed some
sensitivity to changes in the rate of hospital admission (£6,384 to £10,424 per
QALY gained) and treatment effect of ivabradine on quality of life (£6,283 to
£9,253 per QALY gained). Changes in hospital length of stay and ivabradine
treatment effect on NYHA class had much less impact on the ICER, £6,938 to
£8,549 and £7,232 to £8,349 per QALY gained respectively.
3.34 The manufacturer's probabilistic sensitivity analysis indicated that ivabradine plus
standard care would have a more than 95% chance of being cost effective
compared with standard care alone if the maximum acceptable ICER was
£20,000 per QALY gained.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 19 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
3.35 The manufacturer carried out different scenario analyses to manage uncertainties
about some of the assumptions in the base-case model. The scenario analyses
explored the effect on the ICER of: varying the treatment duration of ivabradine;
ivabradine's treatment effect stopping after 5 and 10 years; using alternative
models to estimate the risk of cardiovascular mortality; increasing the median
length of hospital stay based on the 'National heart failure audit' data; and
excluding the costs of the titration visit and the ECG. The manufacturer also
carried out other scenario analyses, including: using a within-trial time horizon;
using external data to extrapolate cardiovascular mortality and utility values;
including age-adjusted utility values; and assuming a 5% change in the
distribution of NYHA classes (from 1 to 2, from 2 to 3, and from 3 to 4) in the
post-trial period. After a clarification request, the manufacturer also provided a
scenario analysis in which a new regression equation was developed to predict
NYHA class distribution. This was adjusted for treatment, time covariates and
patient baseline characteristics, and drug prices were updated to those in BNF
63. These scenario analyses all gave ICERs below £9,000 per QALY gained
except for the assumptions of the treatment effect of ivabradine stopping after 5
and 10 years and using the within-trial time horizon, which gave ICERs ranging
from £13,964 to £15,200 per QALY gained.
3.36 The manufacturer carried out several subgroup analyses based on individual
patient characteristics from the population covered by the marketing
authorisation. These subgroups were based on age, NYHA class, beta-blocker
doses, heart failure duration, level of left ventricular ejection fraction, and prior
medical history (coronary artery disease and diabetes). The results showed that
ivabradine plus standard care was still cost effective when compared with
standard care alone. The estimated ICERs for the subgroups were all below
£11,000 per QALY gained and ranged from £5,197 to £10,427 per QALY gained.
The manufacturer also carried out additional subgroup analyses based on a
population representative of a UK chronic heart failure patient group. This
population was specified as western European men with a median age of
78 years, receiving at least half the target dose of beta-blockers. The ICER
generated for this subgroup was £8,735 per QALY gained, and the ICER for a UK
chronic heart failure patient group taking the target dose of beta-blockers was
£9,185 per QALY gained.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 20 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Evidence review group comments
3.37 The ERG was satisfied with the manufacturer's modelling approach, which was
transparent, used patient-level data and was consistent with other published
economic studies on heart failure treatments. The ERG stated that the
manufacturer did not carry out an analysis in a patient population with a disease
severity reflective of the UK population. However, it agreed with the manufacturer
that using values for patient characteristics beyond the SHIFT population range
may generate unreliable results. The ERG was satisfied that the standard care
treatments used in SHIFT and the economic model reflected UK clinical practice.
3.38 The ERG accepted the manufacturer's use of Office for National Statistics UK life
tables to provide estimates of non-cardiovascular mortality in the base case
because this is standard practice in heart failure cost-effectiveness analyses.
However, it noted that the risk of non-cardiovascular mortality was higher in
SHIFT than in the UK life tables. The ERG noted that there were some
uncertainties associated with the regression analyses performed for
cardiovascular and heart failure mortality, which limited the potential of
ivabradine to reduce the risks of these 2 outcomes. The treatment effect of
ivabradine in the regression analysis was not statistically significant for
cardiovascular mortality (p=0.38) and was borderline statistically significant
(p=0.06) for heart failure mortality (although these results had been statistically
significant for the population covered by the marketing authorisation only). By
contrast, beta-blockers given at 50% or more of the target dose were associated
with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular mortality for
ivabradine compared with placebo and beta-blockers at any dose were
associated with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of heart failure
mortality for ivabradine compared with placebo. Because baseline heart rate was
adjusted for in the regression analysis, the ERG thought that the risk reduction of
ivabradine and beta-blockers was in addition to the attenuating effect of heart
rate.
3.39 The ERG indicated that the regression model for health-related quality of life in
the manufacturer's submission was clinically plausible and the disutility
associated with hospital admission was likely to have captured any serious
impact of adverse events on quality of life because hospital admission would be
the main consequence of serious adverse events. The ERG noted that the impact
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 21 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
of age adjustment for health-related quality of life was minimal (it increased the
ICER by £216 per QALY gained). Therefore, it accepted the exclusion of age
adjustment from the base-case analysis because of the time needed to re-run
each cycle to adjust for age throughout the model's time horizon. The ERG was
satisfied with the costing approach taken by the manufacturer in the economic
analysis.
3.40 The ERG considered that the manufacturer's base-case ICER of £8,498 per QALY
gained (incremental costs of £2,376 and incremental QALYs of 0.28) was likely to
represent the expected cost effectiveness of adding ivabradine to standard care,
although the ERG believed it was biased against ivabradine. The ERG was
satisfied with the manufacturer's pragmatic approach of conducting the
sensitivity analyses using average patient characteristics because of the longer
analysis time needed to use individual patient profiles for the base case. It
indicated that the reduced level of accuracy with this method was unlikely to
alter any conclusions drawn from the evidence presented. The ERG was
particularly interested in the cost-effectiveness results for the subgroups of
patients at different doses of beta-blockers. It noted that the ICERs for these
subgroups and all other subgroups analysed remained below £11,000 per QALY
gained. However, the ERG noted that the regression equations used were based
on the main trial population of SHIFT or the population covered by the marketing
authorisation, rather than the particular subgroups of patients considered. It
accepted that breaking randomisation and smaller patient numbers would
compromise any analyses based on regression equations developed from
subgroups. The ERG highlighted that the hazard ratios estimated from regression
equations based on the main trial population of SHIFT or the population covered
by the marketing authorisation may over (or under) estimate the effect of
ivabradine treatment in particular patient populations.
3.41 Overall, the ERG considered the modelled results to be conservative because
they underestimated the risk of cardiovascular mortality, the rate of hospital
admission and the relative effect of treatment with ivabradine plus standard care
compared with standard care alone. It stated that the sensitivity and subgroup
analyses sufficiently addressed any areas of uncertainty.
3.42 Full details of all the evidence are in the manufacturer's submission and the ERG
report.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 22 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The appraisal committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of ivabradine, having considered evidence on the nature of chronic
heart failure and the value placed on the benefits of ivabradine by people with
the condition, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It also took into
account the effective use of NHS resources.
Clinical effectiveness
4.2 The committee considered the clinical need for treatment in people with heart
failure who are covered by the marketing authorisation of ivabradine. The
committee noted that the clinical specialists indicated that ivabradine is primarily
a heart-rate-lowering drug for people with left ventricular systolic dysfunction
who are in sinus rhythm and for whom beta-blockers are not suitable. The
committee heard from the clinical specialists that people with chronic heart
failure have a poor quality of life. It also noted the comment from the patient
experts that chronic heart failure can impact on everyday tasks, with
comorbidities increasing the impact of the disease and usually requiring lifestyle
changes. The patient experts also stated that ivabradine may provide
symptomatic and prognostic benefit in a small number of chronic heart failure
patients unable to take beta-blockers. The committee considered the clinical
specialists' comment that it may be difficult to increase beta-blocker dosage for
people with low blood pressure, a group who would benefit from ivabradine. It
noted that ivabradine is contraindicated in severe hypotension (less than 90/
50 mmHg). The committee recognised the impact of chronic heart failure on
quality of life and concluded that there were potential treatment benefits with
ivabradine for people who are covered by the marketing authorisation.
4.3 The committee considered the generalisability of the SHIFT trial to UK clinical
practice. The committee was aware that the population covered by the marketing
authorisation in SHIFT was younger, included a higher proportion of men and
people with more severe chronic heart failure than the typical chronic heart
failure population in the UK. It also noted that only a few people from the UK were
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 23 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
included in the trial and the use of cardiac devices in the trial was low. The clinical
specialists and the ERG indicated that the differences in age and severity of
chronic heart failure may be caused by patient recruitment from specialist heart
failure centres, which is common with randomised trials. The committee
considered the comments from the clinical specialists and the ERG that the
results of the trial could be extrapolated to a UK setting because the standard
therapies used in SHIFT could be regarded as optimal and were given at similar
dosing levels to UK clinical practice. Despite the differences between the trial and
the UK population, the committee concluded that SHIFT was relevant to UK
clinical practice.
4.4 The committee examined the clinical evidence from SHIFT, which compared
ivabradine plus standard care with standard care plus placebo. The committee
noted that it was a well-conducted clinical trial and that the relevant clinical
outcomes of mortality and hospital admission were assessed. It also noted that
health-related quality-of-life data were collected in SHIFT-PRO using both
generic and disease-specific instruments, and was aware that improved quality
of life was an important outcome for chronic heart failure patients and that this is
considered to be 1 of the main aims of managing chronic heart failure. The
committee noted that the committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use had
asked the manufacturer to identify the heart rate threshold at which there was a
significant mortality benefit with ivabradine, because this benefit was not
observed in the main SHIFT population. So the manufacturer then examined a
post hoc subgroup of people with a baseline resting heart rate of 75 bpm or
more, and this subgroup formed the population for whom ivabradine has a
marketing authorisation. The committee noted that the results from this subgroup
demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in all primary and secondary
endpoints assessed. This included cardiovascular death, which reduced by 17%
with ivabradine compared with placebo, unlike in the main SHIFT population, in
which the 9% reduction in cardiovascular death was not statistically significant.
The committee was aware that baseline resting heart rate was not a stratification
factor at randomisation and that this subgroup was identified post hoc, but it was
also aware that recommendations could only be made within ivabradine's
marketing authorisation. The committee concluded that SHIFT was well
conducted and there was it was plausible biologically that a statistically
significant mortality benefit will be observed in the subgroup of people with a
baseline resting heart rate of 75 bpm or more, which reflects the marketing
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 24 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
authorisation of ivabradine. However, they were aware the evidence presented
should be interpreted with a level of caution because the subgroup was identified
post hoc.
4.5 The committee noted that a previous hospital admission for worsening heart
failure in the past 12 months was an inclusion criterion for SHIFT. The committee
agreed that this was an important consideration because people with a prior
hospital admission in the past 12 months may have more severe chronic heart
failure than would be observed in clinical practice, with a higher risk of further
hospitalisations, which was the key driver of the clinical and cost-effectiveness
estimates. The committee noted that the marketing authorisation for ivabradine
depended on the efficacy of ivabradine in a specific post hoc subgroup with more
severe heart failure (with a baseline heart rate of 75 bpm or more) to
demonstrate a cardiovascular mortality benefit. The committee heard from the
clinical specialists that prior hospital admission should not be a factor for
considering ivabradine treatment because there are no data to prove that the
efficacy of ivabradine is limited to the population who have been admitted to
hospital in the previous 12 months. The clinical specialists also highlighted that
people had to be stabilised for 4 weeks on standard therapy as an entry criterion
into the trial. The committee considered that prior hospital admission did not
affect mortality, and the marketing authorisation did not make any reference to
prior admission status. The committee was aware that ivabradine was
contraindicated for people with unstable heart failure. Therefore, when
discussing ivabradine, it understood it could only be initiated after prior
stabilisation therapy. The committee concluded that all people for whom
treatment with ivabradine is suitable, according to the marketing authorisation,
should be able to receive ivabradine regardless of hospital admission status, but
that people should be stabilised for 4 weeks on standard therapy first.
4.6 The committee considered the adverse event profile associated with ivabradine
plus standard care compared with placebo plus standard care. The committee
noted that symptomatic bradycardia, atrial fibrillation and phosphenes occurred
more frequently in the ivabradine group compared with the placebo group,
although other serious adverse events were higher in the placebo group. It noted
the comments from the clinical specialists that phosphenes are recognised
adverse effects of ivabradine, which usually resolve in most patients during
treatment. The clinical specialists also stated that ivabradine appeared to be
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 25 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
much simpler and safer to use compared with most heart failure drugs. The
committee was concerned that an unusually high proportion of people in the
population covered by the marketing authorisation who received a beta-blocker
were not treated with the target dose because of hypotension, especially
because the mean systolic blood pressure in the population covered by the
marketing authorisation was 121 mmHg. It also noted that it would be unusual for
people with heart failure to have hypotensive symptoms with this level of blood
pressure. It noted the ERG's comment that it has been reported that only 3% to
5% of patients eligible for treatment with beta-blockers are unable to tolerate
them because of hypotension or bradycardia. The committee concluded that
ivabradine plus standard care had a manageable adverse event profile in the
population covered by the marketing authorisation.
4.7 The committee examined the exploratory analysis performed by the ERG on the
efficacy of ivabradine according to beta-blocker dose received by the population
covered by the marketing authorisation in SHIFT. The committee noted the
impact of the beta-blocker doses on the effectiveness of ivabradine, particularly
in terms of cardiovascular mortality. However, the committee agreed that this
analysis was based on subgroups of a subgroup and should be interpreted with
caution. The clinical specialists stated that these results further highlight the
need for beta-blockers to be used at optimal doses before ivabradine is initiated,
because there is good evidence that beta-blockers reduce cardiovascular
mortality at optimal doses. They also emphasised that ivabradine would be less
effective in people with chronic heart failure who are optimally treated with beta-
blockers because both treatments are primarily heart-rate-lowering agents,
although beta-blockers are known to have additional effects beyond their heart-
rate-lowering properties. The committee concluded that, given the results of
these exploratory analyses, the effectiveness of ivabradine with increasing beta-
blocker doses is uncertain.
4.8 The committee also discussed the exploratory analysis performed according to
NYHA class by the ERG for the population covered by the marketing
authorisation. It heard from the clinical specialists that it was debatable whether
the NYHA class 4 subgroup could be considered to be in a stable condition given
the severity of their heart failure and that ivabradine is contraindicated in
unstable heart failure. The committee also heard from the clinical specialists that
the benefit observed in this subgroup of people would be expected because they
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 26 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
are the population with the greatest risk of cardiovascular mortality. However, the
committee noted that the analysis in this subgroup of people with NYHA class 4
heart failure was based on small numbers, which limits the robustness of the
results. Therefore, the committee concluded that the effectiveness of ivabradine
in people with NYHA class 4 heart failure was uncertain because of the small
patient numbers in the analysis, which meant that these people could not be
considered separately as a subgroup.
4.9 The committee discussed the position of ivabradine in the treatment pathway for
chronic heart failure, noting that it is indicated in chronic heart failure NYHA
class 2 to 4 with systolic dysfunction, for people in sinus rhythm whose heart rate
is 75 bpm or more, and in combination with standard therapy including beta-
blocker therapy or when beta-blocker therapy is contraindicated or not tolerated.
The committee heard from the clinical specialists that ACE inhibitors, beta-
blockers and aldosterone antagonists used routinely for managing chronic heart
failure should always be the initial treatments, because there is robust evidence
that they are effective in managing chronic heart failure and improving survival.
The clinical specialists all agreed that ivabradine is an additional therapy for a
subset of people with chronic heart failure who are in sinus rhythm, and not as a
replacement for the recommended standard therapies such as ACE inhibitors,
beta-blockers and aldosterone antagonists. They suggested that ivabradine
should be considered only when patients are still symptomatic after being
stabilised on optimal initial standard therapies at maximally tolerated doses, or
when beta-blockers are contraindicated or not tolerated. The clinical specialists
expressed their concerns that introducing ivabradine earlier than specified in the
marketing authorisation would limit efforts to optimise the use of other standard
drugs, particularly beta-blockers. They stressed the need for enough time to
titrate beta-blockers to optimal doses according to the 'start low, go slow'
recommendations in NICE's previous guideline on chronic heart failure (now
replaced by NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults). The committee
concluded that ivabradine should be initiated only after standard treatment with
ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and aldosterone antagonists has been optimised.
4.10 The committee explored what optimising standard therapy with beta-blockers
meant in clinical practice. It heard from clinical specialists that it can take several
months to appropriately titrate beta-blockers to the optimal dose for a patient.
The committee was aware that to optimise and ensure adherence to beta-blocker
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 27 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
therapy, continuous monitoring and education and support of the patient by
members of the heart failure multidisciplinary team are needed. The committee
also noted comments from consultees and commentators that there have been
misconceptions that beta-blockers are contraindicated in, for example, the
elderly, or in people with non-reversible chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease or erectile dysfunction. It noted
that, in line with NICE's previous guideline on chronic heart failure (now replaced
by NICE's guideline on chronic heart failure in adults), these groups of people
should receive beta-blockers. The committee re-emphasised their conclusion in
section 4.9 on the importance of optimising beta-blockers before initiating
ivabradine.
4.11 The committee also considered the comments from consultees and
commentators that there is a recent analysis that shows that digoxin may confer
benefits similar to ivabradine for patients in sinus rhythm and with heart failure
caused by left ventricular systolic dysfunction. However, the committee noted
that digoxin was not included as a comparator in the scope for this appraisal and
there was no evidence to support its benefit in this population. The committee
concluded that considering digoxin as a comparator to ivabradine is beyond the
scope of this appraisal.
4.12 The committee also considered the position of cardiac devices, particularly
cardiac resynchronisation therapy, in the treatment pathway for chronic heart
failure because the manufacturer proposed positioning ivabradine before them.
The clinical specialists were uncertain about this and proposed several different
options about the most appropriate choice if people still have symptoms after
they are treated with ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and aldosterone antagonists.
The committee noted that very few patients in SHIFT received cardiac
resynchronisation therapy. It therefore considered that more evidence would be
useful to determine the position of ivabradine in relation to cardiac devices,
particularly cardiac resynchronisation therapy, in the treatment pathway.
However, the clinical specialists said that choosing whether to treat with
ivabradine or cardiac resynchronisation therapy will depend on clinical need and
that ivabradine will only be considered if the person is in sinus rhythm as
indicated in ivabradine's marketing authorisation. The committee was aware that
ivabradine is contraindicated in people whose heart rate is dependent on a
pacemaker. The committee recognised that there was some uncertainty about
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 28 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
the appropriate choice of treatment when people are eligible for both ivabradine
and cardiac resynchronisation therapy, and concluded that the decision will likely
be based on the judgement of the treating clinician.
4.13 The committee considered the comments from the consultees and commentators
that ivabradine should only be given to people with a left ventricular ejection
fraction of 35% or less. It noted that the patients in SHIFT had left ventricular
systolic dysfunction, which was associated with an ejection fraction of 35% or
less, and it was aware that this was an entry criterion for the trial. The committee
was aware that an ejection fraction level was not specified in the marketing
authorisation for ivabradine. However, it considered that ivabradine could not be
recommended in people with an ejection fraction that is above 35% because
there is no evidence of its effectiveness in that group. The committee discussed
how the ejection fraction level will be determined in clinical practice and whether
the required tests will be readily available to people who will potentially benefit
from ivabradine. It heard that ejection fraction level is usually demonstrated with
an echocardiogram and additional tests will not necessarily be required before
initiating ivabradine. Therefore, the committee concluded that ivabradine should
only be initiated in people with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% or less,
normally shown on an echocardiogram.
4.14 The committee considered how ivabradine will be prescribed in clinical practice.
It heard from clinical specialists that a heart failure specialist in secondary care
with access to a multidisciplinary team should initiate ivabradine. The clinical
specialists also stated that titration and monitoring of ivabradine could then take
place in primary care by a GP with a special interest in heart failure or a heart
failure specialist nurse, supported by a multidisciplinary team. They highlighted
that this may help ensure the appropriate patients are treated with ivabradine
after optimising treatment and stabilising patients on maximally tolerated doses
of ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and aldosterone antagonists. However, the
manufacturer anticipated that ivabradine would be prescribed by a clinician
experienced in managing chronic heart failure as recommended in the summary
of product characteristics. The committee discussed the emergence of
increasing heart failure expertise outside secondary care. It noted that NICE's
previous guideline on chronic heart failure (now replaced by NICE's guideline on
chronic heart failure in adults) defined a specialist as a physician with a
subspecialty interest in the management of heart failure and who leads a
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 29 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
specialist multidisciplinary heart failure team of professionals with appropriate
competencies from primary and secondary care. The committee concluded that
ivabradine should be initiated by a heart failure specialist (in line with the NICE
guideline) with access to a multidisciplinary heart failure team and dose titration
and monitoring should then be carried out by a heart failure specialist or in
primary care by either a GP with a special interest in heart failure or a heart
failure specialist nurse.
Cost effectiveness
4.15 The committee considered the manufacturer's economic model and the ERG's
critique of this model. The committee was aware that the manufacturer had
based the economic evaluation on the subgroup of patients with a baseline
resting heart rate of 75 bpm or more. The committee noted that this was the
subgroup for whom ivabradine has a UK marketing authorisation. The committee
concluded that the appropriate population for the economic evaluation of
ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure had been captured in the model.
4.16 The committee discussed the assumptions made by the manufacturer in
developing the economic model. The committee noted the ERG's comment that
the manufacturer's model was transparent and made use of patient-level data in
the base-case analysis. It agreed with the ERG that the standard care treatments
used in the economic model reflected UK clinical practice. The committee was
satisfied that the utility values applied in the model were derived from SHIFT,
which was the pivotal trial used in the economic analysis, and considered the
approach taken by the manufacturer to obtain the final utility estimates to be
plausible and robust. The committee was also satisfied with the costs used by
the manufacturer and that the clinical inputs to the model reflected UK practice.
The committee was aware that the sensitivity analyses conducted by the
manufacturer were robust for the base-case estimate, except for the risk of
cardiovascular mortality (see sections 3.33 and 3.35), and that the ICERs for all
the subgroup analyses were below £11,000 per QALY gained. The committee
concluded that the manufacturer's model was robust and the assumptions were
realistic and conservative.
4.17 The committee considered the uncertainty around the benefit of ivabradine on
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 30 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
cardiovascular mortality given that the ICER ranged between approximately
£5,600 and £40,600 per QALY gained when the risk of cardiovascular mortality
was varied using the 95% confidence interval around the mean from the trial
data. The committee noted the ERG's comments that there were uncertainties
associated with the regression analyses for cardiovascular and heart failure
mortality used in the economic model presented by the manufacturer. The
committee noted that the treatment effect of ivabradine in the regression
analysis had a p value of 0.38 for cardiovascular mortality and a p value of 0.06
for heart failure mortality. For the population covered by the marketing
authorisation in the clinical effectiveness analysis, the p value for cardiovascular
mortality was 0.02, and for heart failure mortality was less than 0.01. On the other
hand, beta-blockers given at 50% or more of the target dose were associated
with a statistically significant reduction in the risk of cardiovascular mortality, and
beta-blockers at all doses were associated with statistically significant reductions
in the risk of heart failure mortality. The committee considered that this further
highlights the importance of optimising beta-blocker therapy before treatment
with ivabradine. However, the committee noted the ERG's comment that the
absence of a statistically significant effect with ivabradine in the model may be a
result of the adjustment of patient characteristics not accounted for in the clinical
analysis. The committee was also aware that the manufacturer's regression
analyses were conservative in favour of placebo, which made the analyses likely
to underestimate the risks of cardiovascular and heart failure mortality, and so
generated different results from those observed in the population covered by the
marketing authorisation of the SHIFT trial. The committee concluded that the
additional treatment effect of ivabradine was uncertain compared with the effect
of beta-blocker doses.
4.18 The committee considered whether the base-case ICER of approximately £8,500
per QALY gained (incremental cost of approximately £2,400 and incremental
QALY of 0.28) of adding ivabradine to standard care estimated by the
manufacturer was the most plausible ICER. The committee considered that the
ICER suggested that ivabradine was cost effective if a threshold of £20,000 per
QALY gained was applied. The committee considered that the effect of
ivabradine on the hospital admission endpoints was the key driver of the cost
effectiveness of ivabradine plus standard care compared with standard care
alone. It noted that ivabradine plus standard care was more effective and cost
more than standard care. Additionally, it noted that ivabradine was still accruing
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 31 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
more QALYs when the confidence interval for the hazard ratio for mortality
crossed 1 and favoured standard care alone in the model, which suggested that
ivabradine has a large impact in reducing hospital admissions. The committee
agreed that the wide range of sensitivity and subgroup analyses conducted by
the manufacturer sufficiently addressed any areas of uncertainty in the economic
analysis, including the beta-blocker subgroups, and all produced ICERs below
£11,000 per QALY gained. It also considered that the modelled results and most
of the model assumptions were conservative and biased against ivabradine. The
committee therefore concluded that the manufacturer's ICER estimate of
approximately £8,500 per QALY gained was plausible and was likely to represent
the expected cost effectiveness of adding ivabradine to standard care for
treating chronic heart failure in the population covered by the marketing
authorisation.
4.19 The committee recognised the novel mode of action of ivabradine as a heart-
rate-lowering agent for patients in sinus rhythm for whom beta-blockers are
contraindicated or not tolerated. It also considered the manufacturer's comment
that ivabradine is the only non-surgical treatment available for people with
chronic heart failure whose prognosis remains poor after recommended
optimised therapy for chronic heart failure. However, the committee considered
that there were no additional gains in health-related quality of life over those
already included in the QALY calculations. The committee therefore concluded
that the innovative aspects of ivabradine were already incorporated in the
economic model and analyses.
4.20 The committee discussed potential equality issues and gave particular
consideration to avoid unlawful discrimination against any group of people on the
grounds of race, gender, disability, religion or belief, sexual orientation, age,
gender reassignment, pregnancy and maternity. The committee noted the
potential equality issue raised by the patient experts about the higher prevalence
of non-revascularisable coronary artery disease in the Asian population because
of the impact of diabetes as a risk factor. It highlighted that higher prevalence
rates are not an equality issue that technology appraisal guidance can address.
Nevertheless, the committee did not consider that the wording of the
recommendations affected access to treatment by this group. The committee
also noted that older people and women were under-represented in SHIFT. But it
considered that the recommendation for ivabradine was not based on sex or age,
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 31 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 32 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
does not vary according to the sex or age of the patient, and that all patients
would benefit from ivabradine. The committee considered that these were not
equality issues under the legislation. The committee therefore concluded that its
recommendations do not have a particular impact on any of the groups whose
interests are protected by the legislation and that there is no need to alter or add
to its recommendations.
4.21 Overall the committee considered the effectiveness of ivabradine in the subgroup
of patients with a resting heart rate of 75 bpm or more derived from SHIFT, the
generalisability of the trial to UK clinical practice, the adverse event profile of
ivabradine, the position of ivabradine in the treatment pathway of chronic heart
failure (that is after optimisation on standard care therapy with ACE inhibitors,
beta-blockers and aldosterone antagonists) and the way ivabradine will be
prescribed in clinical practice. It also considered the robustness of the economic
model, the realistic nature of the assumptions used in the model, the plausibility
of the base-case ICERs and the range of sensitivity analyses presented by the
manufacturer. The committee noted that there were uncertainties associated with
the effectiveness of ivabradine with increasing beta-blocker doses. However, it
was convinced of the benefits of adding ivabradine to the standard care
therapies for chronic heart failure in the group of people covered by the
marketing authorisation. The committee therefore concluded that ivabradine
could be considered a cost-effective use of NHS resources for treating chronic
heart failure in people covered by the marketing authorisation.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 32 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 33 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has chronic heart failure and the healthcare professional responsible for
their care thinks that ivabradine is the right treatment, it should be available for
use, in line with NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 33 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 34 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
6 Appraisal committee members, and
NICE project team
Appraisal committee members
The appraisal committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. Members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. There are 4 appraisal committees, each with
a chair and vice chair. Each appraisal committee meets once a month, except in December
when there are no meetings. Each committee considers its own list of technologies, and
ongoing topics are not moved between committees.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each appraisal committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Professor Andrew Stevens
Chair of Appraisal Committee C, Professor of Public Health, University of Birmingham
Professor Gary McVeigh
Vice Chair of Appraisal Committee C, Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine, Queens
University Belfast and Consultant Physician, Belfast City Hospital
Dr David Black
Director of Public Health, Derbyshire County Primary Care Trust
Dr Daniele Bryden
Consultant in Intensive Care Medicine and Anaesthesia, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS
Trust
Dr Andrew Burnett
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 34 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 35 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Director for Health Improvement and Medical Director, NHS Barnet, London
David Chandler
Lay member
Dr Mary Cooke
Lecturer, School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, University of Manchester
Dr Chris Cooper
General Practitioner, St John's Way Medical Centre, London
Professor Peter Crome
Consultant Geriatrician and Professor of Geriatric Medicine, Keele University
Dr Maria Dyban
General Practitioner, Kings Road Surgery, Glasgow
Professor Rachel A Elliott
Lord Trent Professor of Medicines and Health, University of Nottingham
Dr Greg Fell
Consultant in Public Health, Bradford and Airedale Primary Care Trust
Dr Wasim Hanif
Consultant Physician and Honorary Senior Lecturer, University Hospital Birmingham
Dr Alan Haycox
Reader in Health Economics, University of Liverpool Management School
Professor Cathy Jackson
Professor of Primary Care Medicine, University of St Andrews
Dr Peter Jackson
Clinical Pharmacologist, University of Sheffield
Dr Janice Kohler
Senior Lecturer and Consultant in Paediatric Oncology, Southampton University Hospital
Trust
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 35 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 36 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Ms Emily Lam
Lay member
Dr Grant Maclaine
Director, Health Economics and Outcomes Research, BD, Oxford
Henry Marsh
Consultant Neurosurgeon, St George's Hospital, London
Professor Eugene Milne
Deputy Regional Director of Public Health, North East Strategic Health Authority,
Newcastle upon Tyne
Professor Stephen O'Brien
Professor of Haematology, Newcastle University
Dr Anna O'Neill
Deputy Head of Nursing and Healthcare School and Senior Clinical University Teacher,
University of Glasgow
Professor Katherine Payne
Professor of Health Economics, University of Manchester
Dr Martin Price
Head of Outcomes Research, Janssen-Cilag, Buckinghamshire
Dr Peter Selby
Consultant Physician, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Alan Rigby
Senior Lecturer and Chartered Statistician, University of Hull
Dr Surinder Sethi
Consultant in Public Health Medicine, North West Specialised Services Commissioning
Team, Warrington
Dr John Stevens
Lecturer in Bayesian Statistics in Health Economics, School of Health and Related
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 36 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 37 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
Research, Sheffield
Professor Matt Stevenson
Technical Director, School of Health and Related Research, University of Sheffield
Dr Judith Wardle
Lay member
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
Nwamaka Umeweni
Technical Lead
Bhash Naidoo and Kay Nolan
Technical Advisers
Lori Farrar
Project Manager
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 37 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 38 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
7 Sources of evidence considered by the
committee
The evidence review group (ERG) report for this appraisal was prepared by BMJ
Technology Assessment Group:
• Edwards SJ, Barton S, Nherera L, Trevor N, Hamilton V (2012). Ivabradine for the
treatment of chronic heart failure: A Single Technology Appraisal. BMJ-TAG, London.
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal as
consultees and commentators. They were invited to comment on the draft scope, the ERG
report and the appraisal consultation document (ACD). The manufacturer or sponsor was
also invited to make written submissions. Professional or specialist, patient or carer
groups, and other consultees had the opportunity to give their expert views and, along
with the manufacturer or sponsor, also have the opportunity to appeal against the final
appraisal determination.
Manufacturer or sponsor:
• Servier Laboratories
Professional or specialist, and patient or carer groups:
• South Asian Health Foundation
• British Association for Nursing in Cardiac Care
• British Cardiovascular Society
• British Heart Foundation
• British Society for Heart Failure
• Royal College of Nursing
• Royal College of Physicians
Other consultees:
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 38 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 39 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
• Department of Health
• NHS Devon
• Welsh Government
Commentator organisations (did not provide written evidence and without the right of
appeal):
• Commissioning Support Appraisals Service
• Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety for Northern Ireland
• Health Care Improvement Scotland
• Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
• Pfizer
• National Clinical Guidelines Centre
The following individuals were selected from clinical specialist and patient expert
nominations from the non-manufacturer or sponsor consultees and commentators. They
gave their expert personal view on Ivabradine for the treatment of chronic heart failure by
attending the initial committee discussion and providing written evidence to the
committee. They were also invited to comment on the ACD.
• Professor Martin Cowie, Professor of Cardiology, nominated by British Cardiovascular
Society – clinical specialist
• Dr Suzanna Hardman, Consultant Cardiologist, Nominated by Royal College of
Physicians – clinical specialist
• Dr Simon Williams, nominated by Servier Laboratories Ltd – clinical specialist
• Liz Clark, nominated by NHS Devon and Heart Care Partnership – patient expert.
The following individuals were nominated as NHS commissioning experts by the selected
NHS trust allocated to this appraisal. They gave their expert and NHS commissioning
personal view on ivabradine for the treatment of chronic heart failure by attending the
initial committee discussion and providing written evidence to the committee. They were
also invited to comment on the ACD.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 39 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
--- Страница 40 ---
Ivabradine for treating chronic heart failure (TA267)
• Tina Teague, Head of Locality Commissioning, selected by NHS Devon – NHS
Commissioning expert.
Representatives from the following manufacturer or sponsor attended committee
meetings. They contributed only when asked by the committee chair to clarify specific
issues and comment on factual accuracy.
• Servier Laboratories.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-5667-8
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 40 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 40
