=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "jeaf105.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:44:45.320780",
  "file_size_bytes": 4032263,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/jeaf105.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

EACVI DOCUMENT
European Heart Journal - Cardiovascular Imaging (2025) 26, 1244–1269

Three-dimensional echocardiography in
adults with congenital heart disease: a
scientific statement of the European Society of
Cardiology Working Group on Adult Congenital
Heart Disease and the European Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging of the European Society
of Cardiology
Elena Surkova 1,2*†, Margarita Brida1,2,3†, Denisa Muraru 4,5,
Annemien van den Bosch6, Hani Mahmoud Elsayed7,8, Wei Li 1,2,
Michael A. Gatzoulis1,2, and Giovanni Di Salvo 9
This document was reviewed by members of the 2022–24 EACVI Scientific Documents Committee:
Yohann Bohbot, Julia Grapsa, Niall Keenan, Pal Maurovich-Horvat, and Ivan Stankovic
1Adult Congenital Heart Centre, National Centre for Pulmonary Hypertension, Royal Brompton & Harefield Hospitals, Guys & St Thomas’s NHS Trust, Sydney St, Chelsea, London SW3
6NPL, UK; 2National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Guy Scadding Building, Dovehouse St, London SW3 6LY, UK; 3Department of Medical Rehabilitation, Medical
Faculty, University of Rijeka, Ul. Braće Branchetta 20, Rijeka 51000, Croatia; 4Department of Cardiology, San Luca Hospital, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, P.le Brescia 20, Milan 20149,
Italy; 5Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, Via Cadore 48, Monza 20900, Italy; 6Department of Cardiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Centre Rotterdam, Dr. Molenwaterplein 40, Rotterdam 3015 GD, The Netherlands; 7Department of Cardiology, Aswan Heart Centre, Magdi Yacoub Foundation, Kasr El Hagar Street,
Beside Aswan University Hospital, Aswan, Egypt; 8Department of Adult Echocardiography, Cardiac Investigation Center (CIC), 304, Egypt Medical Center, Dr. Elsheemy Street, Area 10,
Nasr City, Cairo 4450113, Egypt; and 9Department of Woman and Child Health, Paediatric Cardiology and Congenital Heart Disease, University of Padua, Padua 35122, Italy
Received 26 October 2024; revised 5 February 2025; accepted 24 March 2025; online publish-ahead-of-print 28 March 2025
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common inborn defect affecting up to 1% of newborns. The prevalence of CHD has shifted from child-
hood to adulthood, and the number of adult patients living with CHD continues to increase. This patient population presents unique challenges in
diagnostic imaging and management due to complex underlying cardiac morphology, previous operations and interventions, and haemodynamic
conditions. 3D echocardiography (3DE) has significantly improved our understanding of complex anatomic and haemodynamic substrates and
emerged as a clinically useful tool that provides incremental information and complements the routine echocardiographic examination. The advan-
tages of 3DE, including more accurate visualization of anatomic structures, absence of geometrical assumptions regarding shape of cardiac struc-
tures, and ability to obtain a complete view of the structures of interest from multiple perspectives in a beating heart, are especially relevant for
diagnosis and follow-up of CHD in adult population, as well as interventional and surgical planning and guidance. In this scientific statement, we
provide detailed and simple-to-follow descriptions of the added value of 3DE in evaluation of specific cardiac structures encountered in CHD,
its role in diagnosis and follow-up, and training requirements for proficiency in 3DE in adult CHD.
...................................................................................................................................................
Keywords adult congenital heart disease • 3D echocardiography • cardiovascular imaging • scientific statement
* Corresponding author. E-mail: elena.surkova.md@gmail.com
† These authors contributed equally to this work and shared first authorship.
© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for
reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1245
Introduction 3D TTE. The trade-off between spatial resolution, temporal resolution,
and volume size has been optimized to allow the acquisition of larger
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common inborn defect af- data sets with sufficient volume rate in real time. With both 2DE and
fecting up to 1% of newborns. The prevalence of CHD has now shifted 3DE modalities being available in the same probe, 3D data set acquisi-
from infancy/childhood to adulthood, and the number of adult patients tion can now be easily implemented into a standard TTE or TOE exam-
living with CHD continues to increase due to significant advances in ination of ACHD patients with challenging underlying anatomy and
early diagnosis and management.1 Residual or post-surgical lesions haemodynamics (Table 1). These recent developments underscore
and haemodynamic abnormalities are common in this patient popula- the significant advantages of incorporating 3DE into the clinical manage-
tion, and adults with CHD (ACHD) present unique challenges in diag- ment of patients with CHD, leading to improved diagnostic accuracy,
nostic imaging and management due to complex cardiac anatomy and better surgical planning, and enhanced guidance during interventional
haemodynamics. procedures,4–9and address many limitations of conventional 2DE.
The underlying congenital defect and the history of surgical and/or Figure 1illustrates the proposed algorithm for optimal use of 3DE in
interventional procedures require multimodality imaging techniques ACHD.
for accurate diagnosis, follow-up, and optimal timely management, as
symptoms may appear late.2Although 2D echocardiography (2DE) re-
mains the core imaging modality for CHD, 3D echocardiography (3DE) Added value of 3DE for assessment
has significantly improved our understanding of complex anatomic and
of specific cardiac structures in
haemodynamic substrates. 3DE has emerged as a clinically useful tool
that provides incremental information and complements the routine ACHD
2DE examination. Unique advantages of 3DE, such as more accurate
visualization of anatomic structures that is obtained without inherit lim- Ventricles
itations of 1D or 2D techniques, freedom from geometrical assump-
3DE assessment of the LV
tions, and ability to provide complete view of the heart from multiple
Morphology
perspectives, are especially relevant in ACHD diagnosis, risk stratifica-
tion, interventional and surgical planning, and guidance. We aim to pro- Assessment of ventricular morphology is an essential component of
vide herewith the scientific statement on the applications of 3DE in echocardiographic examination in ACHD. Real-time or full-volume
ACHD, the added value of 3DE in evaluation of specific cardiac struc- rendering 3DE can provide detailed assessment of ventricular anatomy
tures encountered in ACHD, its role in patients’ management, and and help to identify key morphological features of the left ventricle (LV),
training requirements for proficiency in 3DE in ACHD. such as fine apical trabeculations, presence of two papillary muscles,
and specific morphological characteristics of the mitral valve included
into the inlet portion of the LV.10,11 (Supplementary data online,
3DE imaging in ACHD
Video S1). Additionally, it is a useful tool to visualize pathological fea-
tures in the LV (e.g. outflow tract lesions, crypts/diverticula, abnormal
The crucial milestones in the history of 3DE have been the develop-
position or number of the papillary muscles, and mitral arcade).
ment of a fully sampled matrix array transducer for 3D transthoracic
echocardiography (TTE) and later—for transoesophageal echocardiog-
raphy (TOE) to enable real-time 3D imaging.3 Continuous develop- LV volumes and EF
ments of 3D TTE transducer technology over the years included Accurate assessment of LV volumes and function is crucial for clinical
increased ultrasound penetration and resolution, lighter probes for dai- diagnosis, decision-making, risk stratification, and predicting outcomes
ly routine scanning with a smaller footprint and better access through in ACHD. LV ejection fraction (EF) calculated by 2DE has significant lim-
narrow rib spaces, higher frequency (up to 2.5/5 MHz) harmonics, im- itations, because it relies on assumptions regarding LV shape, which are
proved 3D image quality, and higher frame rates with 3D TTE and 3D frequently invalid in the ACHD population. Due to frequently present
colour imaging. Suboptimal acoustic window (for example, due to body right ventricular (RV) dilatation or hypertrophy, the LV does not always
habitus or lung disease), however, remains an important limitation of have a ‘bullet’ shape in patients with CHD.10,123DE is free of geometric
Table 1 3DE modalities: benefits and limitations
3DE Utility Advantages Limitations
modality
..............................................................................................................................................
3D TTE • Real-time comprehensive evaluation of cardiac • Non-invasive • Poor acoustic window
chambers and valves • High patient tolerability • Operator dependency
• Detailed anatomic information
• Large availability (bedside)
3D TOE • Higher resolution imaging • Superior image quality • Invasive procedure
• Better visualization of posterior cardiac chambers • Intraoperative and perioperative assessment of • Associated procedural
intracardiac structures risks
• Less dependent on acoustic window • Limited availability
• Need for trained
practitioners
TOE, transoesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1246 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 1 Algorithm for optimal use of 3DE in ACHD.
assumptions, less affected by LV foreshortening due to the possibility to measured by 3DE and by 2D phase-contrast CMR has been described re-
re-align the planes and adjust the LV size to its maximum longitudinal cently in a cohort of 83 adult patients with atrial septal defects (ASDs) (r =
axis, less labour-intensive, more reproducible, and accurate than con- 0.73).20
ventional 2DE.13,14It can contribute significantly to the assessment of Published meta-analyses demonstrated that 3DE-derived LV
LV volumes, function, mass, and its routine incorporation into clinical volumes were underestimated compared with CMR, whereas LV EF
practice is advised.15 revealed excellent accuracy.13,14Pooled analysis of 23 studies (includ-
ing 1638 echocardiograms of patients with acquired and CHD)
demonstrated pooled biases for 3DE- vs. CMR-derived LV
Data acquisition and analysis EDV −19.1 ± 34.2 mL, LV ESV −10.1 ± 29.7 mL, and LV EF −0.6 ±
The 3DE full-volume data set is usually obtained from apical four-chamber 11.8%. Importantly, when the 2DE-derived LV volumes and EF were
view; however, modified transducer position is also acceptable. Care should compared with CMR, they demonstrated significantly higher biases.
be taken to include the entire LV in the 3DE volume. Commercially available Authors concluded that compared with traditional 2D methods,
LV endocardial tracking algorithms should be used offline during post- 3DE is more accurate for LV volumetric assessment and more precise
processing for volumetric analysis. Semi-automated tracking algorithms in- in all three measurements.14This, however, highlights the importance
volve user definition of key reference points in the LV followed by semi- of using method-specific reference values for the LV volumes
automated tracking of the endocardium.16Fully automated method applies (Table 2).15
artificial intelligence in the process of LV chamber segmentation and placing A recent study in a small cohort of patients with CHD with various
endocardial boundaries in the LV for volumetric analysis.17Both methods forms of LV (mean age 18.7 years) compared two different 3DE soft-
provide opportunity to manually adjust the endocardial border, if neces- ware packages for LV mass quantification vs. CMR. Despite overesti-
sary. In the context of CHD, if the LV is in systemic position and there is mation of 3DE-assessed LV mass by 5–10%, results from both 3DE
no significant distortion of its shape, the fully automated method can pro- software demonstrated high correlation with the gold standard tech-
vide fast and accurate quantification; however, in the presence of unusual nique (all r > 0.97).21Similarly, a very good correlation was observed
LV shape (e.g. compressed systemic LV due to RV volume or pressure over- between 3DE and CMR for LV mass in a study of 20 adult patients
load or in patients with the LV in sub-pulmonary position; Figure 2; with CHD and at least moderate 3DE image quality (r = 0.98).22
Supplementary data online, Video S2), manual editing of the LV endocardial When comparing volumetric assessment, it is essential to acknow-
contours is essential to ensure accurate evaluation. Published studies ledge that 3DE and CMR are fundamentally different imaging modal-
showed good correlation of 3DE-derived LV volumes and EF with cardiac ities, each based on distinct physical principles. CMR is considered
magnetic resonance (CMR) measurements in patients with CHD.16,18,19 the ‘gold standard’ for volume quantifications, and direct comparison
Thus, in a population of 32 CHD patients who had same-day evaluation of absolute volume values between 3DE and CMR cannot be per-
by 3DE with LV manual border detection and CMR, a correlation between formed. The measurements obtained from each modality are method
3DE and CMR for LV end-diastolic volume (EDV) was r = 0.97, for LV end- specific, meaning that reference values and normal ranges should be in-
systolic volume (ESV) r = 0.98, and for LV EF r = 0.94. Feasibility of 3DE data terpreted within the context of the imaging technique used and they
acquisition was 91%.16 A good correlation between LV stroke volume are not interchangeable.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1247
Figure 2 3DE assessment of the LV in a patient with transposition of great artery post-Mustard repair. (A) 3D volume rendering of the subpulmonary
LV, systemic RV, and AV valves from ventricular perspective demonstrating semilunar shape of the LV cavity. (B) Flexi-slice display of subpulmonary LV
demonstrating significant difference in LV diameters when 3D volume is being cropped from different echocardiographic planes. (C) 3D surface ren-
dering of the subpulmonary LV and final result of volumetric analysis. Note the compressed semilunar shape of the LV with concave interventricular
septum.
capability of 3DE to capture the entire LV volume offers the opportun-
Table 2 3DE reference values for LV and RV volumes ity to assess global LV dyssynchrony, which is expressed as the standard
and EF (Lang et al.15) deviation of the times taken by LV segments to reach their minimal sys-
tolic volume, indexed to the cardiac cycle length, also called ‘Systolic
......................D .i .m ..e .n ..s .io ..n ..........A .b ..n .o .r .m ...a .li .t .y . .t .h .r .e .s ..h .o .l .d . Dyssynchrony Index’.23Similar to 3D speckle tracking, 3DE assessment
of the LV dyssynchrony currently remains a research tool, and more
Left ventricle EDV index (mL/m2)
prospective studies are needed to establish its diagnostic and prognos-
Male >79
tic role in ACHD population.
Female >71
ESV index (mL/m2)
Male >32 3DE assessment of the RV
Female >28 Morphology
EF (%) 3DE full-volume data sets incorporate all three components of the RV
Male <52 (inflow, apical portion, and outflow) and allow accurate morphological
Female <54 assessment of the RV and right-sided valves and detailed analysis of RV
size, shape, wall motion, function, and contraction patterns (Figure 3;
Right ventricle EDV index (mL/m2)
Supplementary data online, Videos S3and S4). This approach also pro-
Male >87
vides 3D morphological assessment in the beating heart, which is unique
Female >74 compared with other imaging modalities and useful for assessment of dy-
ESV index (mL/m2) namic changes in the RV, such as dynamic RV outflow tract (RVOT) ob-
Male >44 struction or double-chamber RV (Figure 4; Supplementary data online,
Female >36 Videos S4and S5).
EF (%) <45
3DE, 3D echocardiography; EDV, end-diastolic volume; EF, ejection fraction; ESV, Assessment of RV volumes and EF
end-systolic volume. 3DE is the only echocardiographic technique providing direct measure-
ments of RV volumes and EF.153DE-derived RV volumes and EF closely
correlate with CMR-measured parameters in both children and adults
with different cardiac conditions.24–28Similarly to LV, 3DE underesti-
3DE assessment of LV intraventricular dyssynchrony mates RV volumes compared with CMR28; hence, method-specific ref-
Ventricular dyssynchrony is an important form of ventricular dysfunc- erence values should be used when quantifying the RV by 3DE (Table 2),
tion and is very common in ACHD due to previous surgical repair, and CMR and 3DE reference values are not interchangeable.29,30In a
conduction disorder, and/or ventricular–ventricular interaction. The meta-analysis aimed to assess agreement of different imaging modalities
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1248 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 3 3DE assessment of the RV from full-volume data set. Acquired 3DE full-volume data set of the RV can be post-processed and displayed in 3D
volume rendering mode (bottom left) or multi-slice display (bottom middle). Volume rendering is used for qualitative assessment of RV and interventricular
septum morphology, tricuspid and pulmonary valve anatomy, and leaflet motion, morphology, and function of the RVOT. Multi-slice display is useful for detailed
assessment of regional shape and wall motion. It is also useful during data acquisition to ensure that the whole RV is encompassed in the 3DE full-volume data set
with no stitching or dropout artefacts. Volumetric analysis of the RV can be performed from the same data set (bottom right). Dedicated software packages
allow to measure RV end-diastolic, end-systolic, and stroke volumes, calculate EF, and generate the volume curve which details emptying and filling of the RV
during cardiac cycle. Surface-rendered 3D model of the RV combining the wire-frame display of the EDV and the surface-rendered dynamic model of the RV
changing throughout the cardiac cycle enables visual assessment of contribution of different components of the RV pump function to the total EF.
Figure 4 3DE morphological assessment of the RVOT in a patient with repaired TOF and residual RVOT obstruction. MPR mode provides visualization of
the narrowest portion of the RVOT during whole cardiac cycle and helps to obtain en-face view of the RVOT orifice and measurements of the narrowest part
perpendicular to the RVOT ‘tunnel’ both in diastole (1.1 × 1.6 cm) and systole (0.6 × 0.9 cm) appreciating dynamic nature of the RVOT obstruction.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1249
Table 3 Comparison of 3DE-derived vs. CMR-derived RV volumes and EF in patients with CHD
Reference Population Sample Feasibility RV EDV: RV ESV: RV EF: correlation
size (%) correlation with correlation with with CMR and
CMR and mean CMR and mean mean difference
difference difference
..............................................................................................................................................
Trzebiatowska-Krzynska Adults with corrected TOF, 36 97 r = 0.82; r = 0.75; r NA;
et al.34 PS, DCRV −8.5 ± 33 mL −13.2 ± 29 mL −3 ± 16%
Park et al.37 Adults with ASD or severe 65 (including 91 r = 0.96; r = 0.93; −7.8 ± r = 0.93; −0.7 ± 4.2%
TR or HVs 15 HVs) −13.0 ± 26.3 mL 23.4 mL
Hadeed et al.38 Paediatric patients (median 136 97.8 r = 0.89; r = 0.97; r = 0.98;
age 12.5 years) with various (including 30 −3.0 mL/m2, LOA 0.2 mL/m2, LOA from −2.1%, LOA from
CHD with RV volume HVs) from 11.3 to −10.5 to +10.9 mL/m2 5.4% to −9.7%
overload and HVs −17.4 mL/m2
Laser et al.39 Paediatric patients (median 38 (including 90% R2 = 0.97; R2 = 0.98; NA (SV: R2 = 0.97;
age 12.9 years) with various 17 HVs) 0.8 ± 5.8 mL, LOA 2.0 ± 13.1 mL, LOA −0.4 ± 9.4 mL, LOA
CHD and HVs 12.5 to −10.8 mL 28.2 to −24.2 mL 18.3 to −19.1 mL)
Ferraro et al.40 Paediatric patients (median 50 94%
age 9.5 years) with various
CHD
3DE data set acquired from subcostal view ICC 0.93; ICC 0.81; NA
−2.8 + 20.2 mL −3.7 + 17.1 mL
3DE data set acquired from apical view ICC 0.94; ICC 0.74; NA
−5.7 + 19.1 mL −10.6 + 17.76 mL
Earlier studies investigating agreement of 3DE and CMR-derived RV volumes and EF are summarized elsewhere.10
3DE, 3D echocardiography; CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; EDV, end-diastolic volume; EF, ejection fraction; ESV, end-systolic volume; HV, healthy volunteers; ICC, intraclass
correlation; LOA, limits of agreement; NA, not available; RV, right ventricle.
for evaluation of RV EF compared with the gold standard technique estimation of RV volumes and EF by 3DE in CHD and correlation
CMR, 3DE has overestimated RV EF only by 1.16% vs. CMR.31 with CMR (while studies published before 2016 have been summarized
The most recent systematic review and meta-analysis aiming to validate in the expert consensus document by Simpson et al.10).
real-time 3DE against CMR based on pooled data from 518 patients with Training and experience are essential components for correct data
various cardiac conditions also provided promising results: the pooled acquisition and post-processing to ensure optimal results of RV quan-
mean differences for RV EDV and ESV and RV EF between 3DE and tification by 3DE. Several steps during data analysis (such as proper
CMR were −5.48 mL [95% confidence interval (CI) −9.33, −1.62 mL], alignment of the data set, scrolling and manual checking the borders be-
− 0.78 mL (95% CI −5.63, 4.07 mL), and −0.20% (95% CI −1.22, tween blood and myocardium, counting only the compact portion as
0.82%), respectively. The differences between 3DE and CMR for ESVs myocardium and the rest as the blood pool, and necessity of manually
and EF were non-significant.32 correcting the 3D model created by the software to obtain optimal re-
In a small study of patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), sults) should be followed.39,41This strategy leads to high accuracy of
3DE-derived RV EF demonstrated significantly better agreement with 3DE in the quantification of RV volumes compared with CMR.26,39
CMR-derived EF compared with conventional echocardiographic para- 3DE-derived RV EF is significantly associated with cardiac and all-cause
meters of RV systolic function such as tricuspid annular plane systolic mortality and major adverse cardiac events in patients with various car-
velocity (TAPSE), myocardial performance index, or S’.33 diovascular conditions.27,42–45A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that
Current guidelines for chamber qualification recommend 3DE-derived reduction in 3DE-derived RV EF showed stronger association with ad-
RV EF > 45% as the lower limits of normal values and specify 3DE as a verse clinical outcomes than conventional RV functional indices and
method of choice for assessment of RV volumes and systolic function.15 might further refine the risk stratification of patients with cardiac dis-
Several studies specifically focused on patients with CHD. In patients eases.46In CHD, several 3DE-derived parameters demonstrated strong
with repaired TOF and pulmonary stenosis post-valvotomy, a good predictive value in identification of patients with repaired TOF who have
correlation has been demonstrated between 3DE and CMR for meas- impaired exercise capacity as assessed by cardiopulmonary exercise
uring RV volumes.33–35Although 3DE tended to underestimate the RV test.47 More data, however, need to be generated on prognostic role
volumes, when method-specific reference values were used, all patients of 3DE in ACHD.
with dilated RV according to CMR were identified correctly by 3DE.34 Limitations of 3DE in ACHD population include potential incom-
A study including unselected patients with complex CHD demon- plete visualization of the whole chamber in case of severe RV dilation
strated similar results with 3DE underestimating RV EDV and ESV by and challenges in endocardial delineation in case of hypertrophied/heav-
34 ± 65 and 11 ± 55 mL, respectively, compared with CMR.36 ily trabeculated RV walls (e.g. systemic RV). Nevertheless, several stud-
Good correlation has been also demonstrated for RV EF in ACHD ies including unselected patients with complex CHD demonstrated
population, such as in patients with repaired TOF35or in patients with good feasibility and shorter data acquisition and analysis time compared
dilated RV due to ASD.37 Table 3 provides recently available data on with CMR36(Table 3). In case of challenging apical windows, full-volume
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1250 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 5 3DE RV data acquisition and analysis from a subcostal view. (A) 2DE subcostal view in a patient with single ventricle physiology and dominant
RV demonstrating good image quality. (B) 3DE RV full-volume data set, multi-slice display, multi-beat (6 beats) acquisition; it demonstrates good image
quality, inclusion of the whole RV into the volume, absence of noise or stitching artefacts. (C) Re-aligning of the single ventricle (RV) during data post-
processing. (D) Quantification of the single ventricle (RV) volumes and EF using a dedicated software package.
3DE data set for the RV can be acquired from subcostal view (Figure 5; 3DE assessment of the systemic RV
Supplementary data online, Videos S6and S7). A study in CHD patients 3DE is a useful tool for the assessment of the size and systolic function
has demonstrated that for apical and subcostal views, 3DE-derived ven- of the systemic RV53,54(Figure 6). Although data acquisition and analysis
tricular volumes agree well with CMR.40 may be challenging due to systemic RV dilatation and heavy trabecula-
tion, feasibility may reach 70% in experienced centres.55,56It has been
demonstrated that 3DE-derived systemic RV EF strongly correlated
Assessment of the relative contribution of different components of the RV
with BNP level and this correlation was higher compared with other
systolic function
conventional echocardiographic parameters including fractional area
Further post-processing of 3DE RV data set enables quantification of change, TAPSE, and S’.55 Data on the correlation of 3DE- and
the relative contribution of longitudinal, radial, and anteroposterior CMR-derived volumes and EF of the systemic RV are limited; however,
motion components of the RV to the global RV systolic function and small studies of ACHD patients demonstrated acceptable agreement
provides detailed characterization of RV contraction pattern. The rela- between the two modalities.56,57
tive reduction in radial component (inward motion of the RV free wall) Assessment of the contraction patterns of the systemic RV using
can be an early sign of RV pressure overload.48In contrast, in RV vol- 3DE demonstrated significant differences in RV wall motion compo-
ume overload, the longitudinal RV component is more impaired than nents in patients with transposition of the great arteries (TGA)
either the radial or the anteroposterior components.49In patients after post-atrial switch repair and with congenitally corrected TGA. The an-
cardiac surgery, there is a temporal reduction in RV longitudinal short- teroposterior component was dominant in TGA post-atrial switch re-
ening; however, the RV EF usually remains maintained due to compen- pair, providing compensation for impaired longitudinal and radial
satory increase in the radial motion. Data on the prognostic role of components, while in congenitally corrected TGA, all three compo-
different components of RV systolic function in congenital population nents contributed equally to the total EF.55
are scarce.
3DE assessment of the functionally single ventricle
RV shape analysis Morphology
3DE also allows quantification of global and regional RV shape indices There are many anatomical variations and ventricular morphologies in
based on analysis of the RV curvature.50,51In patients with pulmonary this group of patients. The majority of adult patients with single ven-
hypertension and RV pressure overload, the curvature of the RV inflow tricular physiology will have Fontan type of operation during childhood;
tract was a more robust predictor of mortality than 3DE-derived RV some may only have palliation with arterial shunts. In very rare cases,
EF, volumes, or other regional curvature indices.50The reference values patients may survive into adulthood with native anatomy and balanced
of 3DE regional curvature indices are currently available.52 circulation with either pulmonary hypertension or pulmonary stenosis.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1251
Figure 6 Quantification of the RV volumes and EF in a patient with transposition of great arteries post atrial switch repair (systemic RV). (A) A soft-
ware package is used for the assessment of 3DE volumes and EF of the systemic RV. First step includes alignment of the 3DE full-volume data set. (B) At
the second step, endocardial contours are placed at end-diastole and end-systole by the software, and manual adjustment is allowed if necessary for
correct contouring of the RV walls and including RV trabeculation and moderator band into the blood pool. (C) Final results include systemic RV vo-
lumes, EF, and longitudinal strain, as well as volumetric curve of the RV during cardiac cycle, and surface-rendered dynamic model of the systemic RV.
Figure 7 3DE assessment of single ventricle morphology. (A) Heart specimen showing a double inlet LV. (B) 3DE imaging of patient with double inlet
LV. Note both AV valves are entering into the dominant LV. (C) 3DE imaging of the same heart in short axis, showing the en-face view of both AV valves
opening into the dominant LV.
In experienced centres, 3DE can be helpful in the identification of com- of ventricular volumes and EF. Examples of 3DE data acquisition and
plex and various morphologies of the univentricular hearts (Figure 7; volumetric analysis of different morphologies of functionally single ven-
Supplementary data online, Videos S8and S9). tricles are presented in Figure 8. Studies assessing the agreement of
3DE-derived volumes and EF with CMR have limited sample size and
mainly focus on paediatric population, demonstrating good correlation
Assessment of ventricular volume and function of 3DE- and CMR-derived parameters, but underestimation of ven-
Accurate assessment and identification of subtle changes in ventricular tricular volumes and EF when assessed by 3DE, both for morphologic-
volumes and function are crucial in the clinical management. Even minor ally left and right single ventricles.58–613DE-derived EF and volumes in
degree of ventricular dysfunction may have a profound effect on the patients with single ventricle demonstrate good reproducibility and
fragile circulation of these patients. Due to variable ventricular shape, correlate with main prognostic cardiopulmonary exercise test para-
semi-automatic tracing method is a preferable solution for assessment meters, such as VO max and VE/VCO slope; however, feasibility
2 2
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1252 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 8 3DE data acquisition and volumetric analysis of functionally single ventricle. (A) Full-volume 3DE data acquisition for double inlet LV using
multi-slice (12 slice) multi-beat approach from apical window. (B) Quantification of ventricular volumes and EF. (C) Full-volume 3DE data acquisition for
functionally single ventricle (RV) in a patient with hypoplastic left heart syndrome post-Fontan repair using multi-slice (12 slice) multi-beat approach
from subcostal window. (D) Quantification of ventricular volumes and EF.
remains limited.62Owing to a small patient population and lack of nor- Quantification
mal values, the 3DE-derived ventricular parameters are the most useful Assessing the severity of stenosis in congenital mitral valve disease
for self-comparison during clinical follow-up.63 might be challenging due to multiple levels of obstruction and eccen-
tric orifices. 3DE helps to visualize the level of obstruction (supra-
Summary valvular, valvular, or subvalvular) by measuring area at different
levels and evaluating dysplasia of mitral valve components (leaflet
3DE aids in identifying complex ventricular morphologies in CHD and
thickening, shortening and fusion of chordae, papillary muscle hypo-
facilitates the assessment of changes in ventricular volumes and function.
plasia). It can also add quantitative data regarding mitral valve plan-
3DE is the only echocardiographic technique that enables measure-
imetry and the extent of tethering (Figure 10). 3D planimetry has
ments of RV volumes and EF and shows superior diagnostic and prog-
been reported as the most accurate method for mitral valve area
nostic value compared with conventional 2DE.
evaluation66–68 and seems to be more reproducible than the 2D
3DE should be attempted for ventricular volumes and EF assessment
in experienced centres and in patients with reasonable image quality. area planimetry.69
Method-specific reference values for LV and RV volumes should be Abnormalities of mitral valve leaflets, chordal apparatus, and
papillary muscles can be better visualized by 3DE demonstrating a
used.
parachute mitral valve or arcade. In mitral regurgitation, 3DE accur-
ately displays isolated clefts and differentiates them from the zone
Valves
of apposition within the atrioventricular (AV) septal defect (AVSD)
Mitral valve/left AV valve complex. The exact aetiology can be clearly defined by 3DE that
Morphology has shown greater efficiency than 2DE in detecting defects such as
AV valves are complex units composed of annulus, leaflets, tendinous isolated cleft or double orifices mitral valve70–72 (Figures 10 and 11;
chords, and papillary muscles. Consider each of these components Supplementary data online, Videos S11 and S12). Additionally, 3DE
when assessing valve morphology and function. 3DE provides a depth provides quantitative evaluation of mitral regurgitation severity, show-
of field and allows to obtain ‘en-face’ views of the valve and, therefore, en- ing superiority in defining eccentric jets and the dimensions of vena
ables recognition of crucial morphological features, such as saddle-shaped contracta. The 3D vena contracta area correlates with the regurgitant
annulus, curved coaptation line, leaflets scallops, fibrous continuity in volume.73 The 3DE Proximal Isovelocity Surface Area (PISA) tech-
between anterior mitral leaflet and aortic non-coronary leaflet, insertion nique allows measurement of the 3D surface of the proximal flow
of primary and secondary order chords, and respective position of convergence region without shape assumptions and, therefore, in-
papillary muscles in between each other (‘chordal projection’),64 thus, creases the accuracy of regurgitant orifice area measurement, which
ensuring a better description for the surgeon and overcoming issues re- correlates well with CMR-derived regurgitant volume.74
lated to geometrical assumptions and interpretation of images (Figure 9; 3D TOE provides higher resolution and superior image quality and
Supplementary data online, Video S10).65 can aid left AV valve evaluation, especially in case of suboptimal
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1253
Figure 9 3DE assessment of mitral valve stenosis. (A) 2DE parasternal short-axis view in a patient with parachute mitral valve. There is a restricted
opening of the mitral valve. (B) 3DE full-volume data set acquired from a left parasternal position; it demonstrates the parachute mitral valve viewed
from the LV perspective; the valve has a large leaflet, resembling the shape of a parachute.
Figure 10 3DE evaluation and planimetry of double orifice mitral valve. (A) 3DE full-volume data set acquired from apical view demonstrating the
double orifice mitral valve viewed from the LV perspective. (B) 3DE colour data set demonstrating mitral valve inflow via two orifices. (C, D) 3D direct
planimetry of the two orifices.
transthoracic acoustic window and if transcatheter interventional pro- planning surgical or transcatheter interventions. In Table 4, we provide
cedures are considered. Finally, 3DE is a promising tool for reconstruc- the main advantages and limitations of 3DE in assessing mitral valve/left
tion of patient-specific 3D models of the valves, which can be helpful in AV valve.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1254 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 11 3DE evaluation of cleft mitral valve. (A) Eccentric severe mitral regurgitation in an adult patient with a dilated LV. (B) Full-volume data set of
the mitral valve visualized from ventricular (left) and from atrial perspective (right) demonstrating cleft of posterior mitral valve leaflet.
Table 4 Advantages and limitations of 3DE in assessment of the AV valves
Advantages Limitations
..............................................................................................................................................
Morphology (1) ‘En-face’ view from atrial side: detailed assessment of annular (1) Full-volume imaging usually results in lower temporal and
shape, number of leaflets, leaflet shape, coaptation line, fibrous spatial resolution. Multi-beat acquisition improves
continuity in between mitral and aortic valve resolution, but a stable ECG trace is necessary
(2) ‘En-face’ view from ventricular side demonstrates valve (2) High-quality images usually require acquisition during breath
orientation within the ventricle, zone of coaptation, fibrous holding
continuity in between mitral and aortic valve subleaflet apparatus (3) New generation of 3D probes overcome these limitations,
(depending on cropping edges) capturing 3D full-volume single beat images without need
(3) ‘Chordal projection’ allows to assess primary and secondary for breath holding
chords attachments and position of papillary muscles
Assessment of (1) 3DE better localizes the level of obstruction: definition of
stenosis supravalvular ring extension, eccentric orifices, complexity of
the subvalvular apparatus
(2) Valve planimetry: simultaneous biplane imaging helps to ensure
that valve planimetry takes place at the leaflet tips; 3D-zoom
data set should include the entire annulus and the leaflet height
(3) Assessment of feasibility of percutaneous interventions, such as
mitral commissurotomy, Anwar score (leaflet thickness,
mobility, and calcifications, subvalvar apparatus)17
(4) Quantification of atrial and ventricular volumes and function
(5) Better reproducibility compared with 2DE evaluations
Assessment of (1) Evaluation of aetiology of regurgitation Low spatial resolution could affect accuracy of 3D PISA
regurgitation (2) Definition of eccentric jets
(3) Quantification of 3D vena contracta
(4) Improved accuracy of effective regurgitant area measured
through PISA technique
(5) Quantification of atrial and ventricular volumes and function
2DE, 2D echocardiography; ECG, electrocardiogram; PISA, proximal Isovelocity Surface Area.
Tricuspid valve/right AV valve leaflets, as well as papillary muscles, can vary in shape and in number.75
For the detailed assessment of the tricuspid valve, the same factors de- Due to the complexity of tricuspid valve geometry and its anterior pos-
scribed for the mitral valve should be considered: leaflets, papillary mus- ition in the mediastinum, 3DE is the preferred imaging technique for as-
cles, chordal attachments, and annulus. Tricuspid valve structure, sessing the anatomy and the pathophysiological mechanisms of valve
however, is physiologically less constant than its left counterpart; dysfunction (Figure 12; Supplementary data online, Videos S13 and
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1255
Figure 12 3DE assessment of tricuspid valve and RV in a patient with Ebstein anomaly. (A) 3DE full-volume data set of the RV, right atrium, and
tricuspid valve; note apical displacement of the septal tricuspid valve leaflet. (B) 3D rendering of the tricuspid valve from functional RV side demonstrat-
ing apical displacement and rotation of tricuspid annular plane and coaptation defect. (C) 3D multi-plane view of the RV and tricuspid valve. (D) 3D
multi-slice (12 slice) view focused on the RV and tricuspid valve.
Figure 13 En-face view of tricuspid valve in a patient with Ebstein anomaly. (A) The tricuspid valve (open) is viewed from the RV and is displaced
downwards into the RV and rotated to the RVOT. (B) The tricuspid valve (closed) is viewed from the RV; it demonstrates the attachment of the septal
leaflets to the interventricular septum and the malcoaptation of the leaflets.
S14).76,77It has been demonstrated that 3D TTE is feasible for the as- Simultaneous visualization of all tricuspid valve leaflets is highly feas-
sessment of the tricuspid valve in complex CHD, such as TOF or hypo- ible using 3DE, unlike 2DE. Due to unlimited rotation of the cropping
plastic left heart syndrome, and identifies unique differences in valve plane, the ‘en-face’ view of the valve can be obtained in experienced
morphology.78Future studies are needed to clarify the clinical signifi- centres even in such complex morphologies, such as Ebstein anomaly.
cance of tricuspid valve morphology in these patient populations. ‘En-face’ views from the RV and atrial perspectives (surgical view) are
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1256 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 14 3DE assessment of the common AVV in a patient with complete AVSD. (A) Colour Doppler apical four-chamber view showing common
AVV with severe regurgitation. (B) 3D volume rendering of common AVV from ventricular perspective. 3DE allows clear visualization of all five leaflets
of the valve, confirms common annulus and absence of AV septum, and classifies it as Type A complete AVSD by Rastelli classification. (C) 3D volume
rendering of interatrial and interventricular septae from the right cardiac chambers in a diastolic frame (valve open) and systolic frame (valve closed).
3DE allows assess spatial relationships between the valve leaflets and septal defect. (D) 3D rendering of LV at the level of papillary muscles demonstrat-
ing their abnormal position and chordal attachments. (E) 3D volume rendering of LVOT in long axis demonstrating LV inlet-outlet disproportion (a
‘goose neck’ appearance of LVOT). A, anterior leaflet; AB, anterior bridging leaflet; AVV, atrioventricular valve; M, mural leaflet; PB, posterior bridging
leaflet.
essential to define the spatial relationship of the tricuspid valve leaflets leaflets with the atrial and ventricular septum. 3DE is the only imaging mo-
with the surrounding structures (Figure 13; Supplementary data online, dality able to provide real-time 3D visualization of leaflets and chordae and
Video S15).79In particular, the ventricular view allows evaluating com- their relations with surrounding structures, such as LV outflow tract
missures and coaptation defect. (LVOT) or ventricular septal defect (VSD) (Figure 14; Supplementary
During semi-quantitative assessment of tricuspid valve function, it is data online, Video S16). Postoperative left AV valve morphology is differ-
important to keep in mind that lower flow velocities and pressures in ent from a normal mitral valve: there is an additional third mural leaflet, a
the RV can have an impact on proximal convergence and regurgitant clockwise rotation of papillary muscles and LV inlet-to-outlet dispropor-
jet analysis. Once colour Doppler scale has been optimized and the im- tion.643DE can help at different steps in AVSD management: pre-surgical
age and the cropping plane are orthogonally oriented, 3D vena contracta assessment, intraoperative monitoring, early follow-up, and long-term
area can be measured with good correlation with EROA.80In this way, follow-up when it can support the identification of the mechanisms of
multiple jets may be measured and summed together. Moreover, 3DE the eventual failure of the left AV valve.65Moreover, 3DE evaluation of
allows to quantify RV volumes and EF, to provide a better description regurgitation is free from geometrical assumptions and therefore can
of haemodynamic impact of AV valve dysfunction.81 be applied also to these valves. It seems that AVSD without ventricular
However, there are also limitations to be considered. First, tricuspid component (primum ASD) is more prone to develop left AV valve failure
leaflets are thinner than mitral ones and obliquely oriented, which may after correction; other, uncommon, risk factors include single papillary
lead to signal dropouts. Second, the fibrous body of the heart as well as muscle or closely spaced papillary muscles, short mural leaflet, short ten-
any prosthetic material may cause acoustic shadowing during TOE, dinous chordae, extremely dysplastic valve or double orifice valve, leaflet
needing a deeper insertion of the probe, with the drawback of origin- prolapse, and anterolateral papillary muscle attachment on the anterior
ating ‘non-isotropic voxels’ and thus limiting spatial resolution of struc- bridging leaflet.82,83
tures parallel to the probe.76
Aortic valve and left outflow tract lesions
Common AV valve The 3DE provides an accurate assessment of the aortic valve morph-
A common AV valve is the key feature of AVSDs. This is a broad spectrum ology and eliminates any geometric assumptions of the LVOT, aortic
of lesions, with significant variability of sizes and relationship of the bridging annulus, and root measurements.84–87Using 3D TTE, the aortic valve
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1257
Figure 15 3D TTE assessment of the aortic valve. (A) 3DE image of the aortic valve and LVOT from a left parasternal position. (B) 3DE of a tricuspid
aortic valve viewed from the aorta. (C) 3DE of a bicuspid aortic valve (closed, left and open, right) viewed from the aorta. The closure line and cusps are
clearly visible.
can be imaged from both parasternal and apical views. For anatomic as- The advantage of 3D TTE (because of the anterior position of the PV,
sessment of the aortic valve, live 3D or 3D-zoom acquisition modes are thus far away from the TOE probe) is that it allows visualization of the
the preferred imaging modes.883DE, measuring the anatomic areas at pulmonary valve and RVOT from multiple perspectives, e.g. ‘en-face’
different levels, adds particular value in CHD where the multiple lesions view of the valve from the superior (pulmonary artery) side, the inferior
can be frequently present (such as parachute mitral valve, subaortic (RV) side, as well laterally in a longitudinal view (Figure 16; Supplementary
stenosis, supravalvular stenosis, and VSD) and can affect the accuracy data online, Videos S17, S20,and S21).1022DE images are very unlikely to
of flow-dependent Doppler parameters of the aortic valve, for ex- visualize all three valve leaflets in cross-sectional view, whereas with the
ample, velocity or gradient. Adding 3D colour Doppler is used to assess 3DE volume data sets, this is feasible in most cases. The 3D TTE short-axis
for aortic regurgitation and cusp integrity; multiplanar reconstructions view can provide detailed information on all three cusps of the pulmonary
parallel to the axis of the regurgitant flow enable direct planimetry of valve including their thickness, mobility, commissures, and opening area
3D vena contracta area and provide added value especially in the presence (Figures 16C and 17). Previous studies showed 60% success rate of pul-
of non-circular or multiple jets.89,90Suboptimal 3D TTE images are rea- monary annulus measurement in patients with valve stenosis.103,104 In
sonable alternative in patients with poor acoustic window or heavily cal- addition, 3DE can evaluate malcoaptation of pulmonary valve leaflets,
cified aortic valve. 3D TOE can provide better image quality with superior and in combination with colour Doppler, it can be planimetered accurate-
spatial resolution and accurate planimetry of the aortic valve orifice area,91 ly and used for quantification of the severity of pulmonary regurgita-
displayed from both aortic and ventricular perspectives, which further im- tion.90,105 For assessment of pulmonary stenosis, planimetry of the
proves the diagnostic accuracy and helps guide interventional procedures stenosis area is possible with 3D TTE and might be more accurate, as
(Figure 15; Supplementary data online, Videos S17–19).92The multiplanar transvalvular gradient can be affected by multiple factors. Further im-
reconstruction mode is useful for accurate measurements of the aortic provement in 3DE TOE imaging techniques will improve its role in percu-
valve area, aortic annulus dimensions, and aortic root size when planning taneous pulmonary valve intervention guidance.
for interventional procedures.93,94
There are several congenital malformations of the aortic valve, which
Summary
include unicuspid, bicuspid, and quadricuspid valves. Although standard
3DE in assessment of the valves should be used for the following:
2DE can define the aortic valve morphology in most cases, the diagnosis
can be difficult in calcified aortic valves and in cases of bicuspid aortic valve • Detailed assessment of the valve morphology (anatomy of the leaflets
when a raphe mimics a commissure. The ability of 3DE to visualize the
and annulus, tenting, straddling, cleft, prolapse, flail, etc.);
aortic valve ‘en face’ from the aorta provides direct visualization of the • Display of the valves from any prospective; aortic valve cusp margins and commissures.95 The diagnostic accuracy • Evaluation of the position of the intracardiac lead(s) and interaction with
of 3D TOE for tricuspid and bicuspid aortic valves has been validated
against contrast-enhanced multi-detector computed tomography.96 3D the valve leaflets;
• Assessment of valve stenosis by 3DE planimetry (including multiple le-
TOE is the best method to visualize subaortic membrane and unmask at-
vels of stenotic lesions);
tachment to the mitral valve anterior leaflet, which may complicate the
• Assessment of origin, number and significance of regurgitant jets; and
repair. The main advantages and limitations of 3DE assessment of the aor-
tic valve and LVOT are summarized in Table 5. • Periprocedural guidance.
Pre-tricuspid shunts
Pulmonary valve and right outflow tract lesions ASDs represent the most common CHD diagnosed in adulthood.106
Optimal imaging of the pulmonary valve is essential in order to clearly de- 3DE approach to image interatrial septum (IAS) has been shown to
fine valve and RVOT morphology in CHD diagnosis and management and have incremental value over the 2DE107,108 and is advised for better
to aid percutaneous pulmonary valve interventions.97–100 Despite ad- evaluation of the IAS defects.109
vances in 3DE imaging, challenges to obtain optimal pulmonary valve 3D TTE assessment of IAS defects is feasible and less invasive com-
images are still present primarily due to signal dropout from the thin valve pared with TOE; however, it is prone to dropout artefacts, especially
leaflets and due to its position right behind the sternum, particularly diffi- when utilizing the apical four-chamber view with ultrasound parallel ra-
cult to visualize from the oesophagus.101In many cases, combination of ther than perpendicular to the IAS, and hence, the best approach is to
image acquisition techniques can help to overcome current limitations. utilize the subcostal view or (recognizing the limitation of this view in
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1258 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Table 5 Advantages and limitations of 3DE in assessment of the aortic and pulmonary valves and ventricular outflow
tracts
Advantages Limitations
..............................................................................................................................................
Morphology (1) ‘En-face’ view from ventricular or vessel side provides detailed (1) Full-volume imaging usually results in lower temporal and
assessment of the number of cusps, presence of raphe, spatial resolution
coaptation, and assessment of aortic sinuses (e.g. height, width, (2) High-quality images usually require multi-beat acquisition
distance from annulus plane to coronary ostia, and sinus tubular during breath holding
junction diameter) (3) New generation of 3D probes overcome these limitations,
(2) Assessment of outflow tracts allow evaluation of obstruction at capturing 3D full-volume single beat images without need
subvalvular level (e.g. subaortic membrane or RVOT obstruction for breath holding
in TOF), location and extent of the obstruction, evaluation of
dynamic component, assessment of RVOT aneurysm(s)
Assessment of (1) Accurate assessment of morphology and eliminates any geometric (1) Suboptimal images in patients with poor acoustic windows
stenosis assumptions of LVOT, aortic annulus, and root measurements or heavily calcified valves, than 3D TOE is preferred
(2) Quantification of stenosis at different levels (e.g. valvular and because of better image quality
subvalvular)
(3) Both vessel- and ventricular perspective can be displayed
(4) Aortic root and valve assessment for TAVR
(5) Detailed assessment of pulmonary valve and RVOT before
interventions
Assessment of (1) Detailed assessment of morphology and aetiology
regurgitation (2) 3D vena contracta measurement
(3) Proper visualization of proximal isovelocity surface area
(4) Measurement of regurgitant volume and fraction by calculating the
RV and LV stroke volumes
(5) Accurate assessment of ventricular size and function with
full-volume 3DE
(6) Live 3D TOE used to guide percutaneous paravalvular leak closure
3DE, 3D echocardiography; LV, left ventricle; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; RV, right ventricle; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; TAVR, transcatheter aortic valve replacement;
TOE, transoesophageal echocardiography; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot.
adult patient population) off-axis views where the ultrasound is more PFO, 3D en-face view of the IAS may not be so helpful as it will only show
perpendicular to the IAS (Figure 18). 3D TTE is emerging as an accurate the edge of the septum secundum overlapping over the septum primum
technique to assess Qp/Qs when compared with CMR, with a very (Figure 20; Supplementary data online, Video S22). In contrast, the ‘en-face’
good feasibility and reproducibility even in dilated RV.20 view of the IAS is very informative in secundum ASD as it can show the
TOE provides superior image quality in the evaluation of IAS. An ex- location, shape of the defect, and give a rough idea about the rims even
ample of TOE 3D imaging protocol for assessment of IAS is provided before detailed measurement (Figure 21A and B). High ostium secundum
in Figure 19. ASD needs to be differentiated from superior vena cava sinus venosus in-
3D TOE is feasible, with high diagnostic accuracy, and provides add- teratrial communication, and the latter is commonly associated with par-
itional detailed and dynamic anatomic data. Speed, resolution, ease of tial anomalous pulmonary venous drainage.111 High ostium secundum
application, and quantitative capabilities continue to improve and ASD is located at the superior part of the septum within the vicinity of
make this method preferable for routine clinical use, especially during the atrium rather than the superior vena cava, and that means they
ASD device closure.110Such well-known limitations of 3DE as lower have a short superior rim that makes the percutaneous closure challen-
temporal resolution compared with 2DE do not produce significant im- ging especially if there is another deficient rim (Figure 21C and D).
pact on imaging of the IAS, which is, unlike valves, a relatively less mobile
structure.
ASDs are classified according to their location.111 Primum ASD
An ostium primum ASD, also called partial AVSD (accounting for 15% of
all ASDs), occurs due to failure of fusion of the endocardial cushions. This
Secundum ASD and PFO
anomaly happens as part of the AVSD spectrum pathology. In 3D imaging,
Secundum ASD, the most common type of all ASDs (80%), is located it shows as a defect that is close to the AV junction with the left and right
within the fossa ovalis due to a true deficiency of septum primum tissue. AV valves located at the same level (Figures 18C, D, and E and 22).
Small secundum ASD needs to be distinguished from a patent foramen
ovale (PFO) as the latter is not a true deficiency of atrial septal tissue,
but rather a tunnel-like communication between the septum primum Sinus venosus ASD
and septum secundum located in the anterosuperior portion of the atrial Sinus venosus defects are typically found within the mouth of one of the
septum.111Because there is no direct defect in PFO unless it is a stretched venae cavae. Although this term is frequently used, they are not true
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1259
Figure 16 3D TTE imaging of the pulmonary valve. (A) 3DE image of the pulmonary valve and RVOT. (B) 3DE image of a Melody pulmonary valve.
(C) 3DE en-face view of the pulmonary valve (closed) viewed from the pulmonary truncus. The closure line is clearly visible; however, visualization of
thin pulmonary valve leaflets is challenging due to dropout artefacts.
Figure 17 3DE assessment of pulmonary valve stenosis. (A) 2D Colour Doppler image demonstrating flow acceleration across pulmonary valve in
parasternal short-axis view. (B) Continuous wave Doppler demonstrating significantly elevated gradients across pulmonary valve. (C) 3DE full-volume
data set of the pulmonary valve cropped demonstrating bicuspid pulmonary valve seen from RVOT perspective; pulmonary valve area is 1 cm2 by 3DE
direct planimetry.
defects of the IAS from a morphological point of view and should be separates the right upper pulmonary vein from the superior vena cava;
referred to as interatrial communications. More common is the super- pulmonary veins from part of the right lung often drain into the right
ior sinus venosus defect (5%) resulting from deficiency of the tissue that atrium or connect anomalously to the superior vena cava (Figure 23;
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1260 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 18 3D TTE assessment of ASD. (A, B) Secundum ASD. Colour Doppler imaging acquired from off-axis apical four-chamber view demon-
strating colour jet across the IAS in fossa ovalis area (*) (A). 3DE full-volume data sets acquired from the same view and rendered to obtain ‘en-face’
view of the IAS from right and left atrial perspective and visualize single centrally located secundum ASD (B). (C–E) Primum ASD in a patient with in-
complete AVSD. 2DE off-axis four-chamber view demonstrating interatrial septal defect (*); note that the defect is in the close proximity of AV valves
and there is no offset of the valves (C). 3DE full-volume data sets acquired from the same view and rendered to obtain ‘en-face’ view of the IAS from
right atrial perspective and visualize small primum ASD (D). 3DE volume rendering of the left AV valve; note trileaflet left AV valve (E).
Supplementary data online, Video S23). Inferior sinus venosus defect, on the defect and assess whether the defect is suitable for percutaneous
the other hand, is a rare defect (<1%) found in the mouth of the inferior closure (Figure 25).
vena cava involving the posterior–inferior aspect of the atrium. In 3DE
imaging, the defect shows within the vicinity of the corresponding vena
Percutaneous closure intraprocedural guidance
cava rather than the atria.
3D TOE provides reliable and optimal results for sizing the complex de-
fects, while 2D TOE may lead to selecting a smaller-sized device.6
Unroofed coronary sinus 3DE-derived ASD area or circumference can reliably predict device size
The unroofed coronary sinus is a rare cardiac anomaly in which a part used for ASD closure through a certain equation 3DE-derived equa-
or the whole common wall between the coronary sinus and the left at- tion.1133D TOE has also shown to significantly decrease radiation expos-
rium is absent. In many cases, it is associated with persistent left super- ure through guiding the right heart catheterization in patient undergoing
ior vena cava.112 3DE allows better delineation of the extent of the ASD closure.114Having the ‘en-face’, anatomically oriented view of the
unroofing compared with the 2DE and helps surgical planning if needed IAS allows better understanding of the anatomy and creates a common
(Figure 24; Supplementary data online, Video S24). language between the interventionist and the echocardiologist in the cath-
eterization laboratory that makes catheter navigation over the septal fas-
ter compared with 2D TOE combined with fluoroscopy.108 It allows
3D quantitative assessment of pre-tricuspid shunts
monitoring of defect crossing, device deployment, and the confirmation
Direct measurements of the shunt dimension are not advised, as
of proper seating of the device on both sides of the IAS without compres-
3D-rendered images and volumes are liable to two main disadvantages:
sing neighbouring structures such as the coronary sinus or vena cava
(i) gain artefacts that can cause oversizing or under-sizing of the defect
(Figure 26; Supplementary data online, Video S25). Percutaneous closure
in lower or higher gain settings, respectively; and (ii) projection, as slight
device complications can be visualized using 3DE, including residual shunts
tilting of the septum to one side will cause underestimation of the lat-
or thrombosis. 3DE was also shown to accurately and systematically char-
eral defect dimension, while backward or forward tilting will cause acterize ASD residual rim in complex ASDs.115
underestimation of the vertical dimension. It is advisable to use the
multi-plane reconstruction (MPR) tool to align the cutting planes
Post-tricuspid shunts
over the defect edges that will allow getting an ‘en face’, 3D-derived
2D plane of the defect for accurate measurement. Using the MPR Evaluation of VSDs should include their location, shape, size, and spatial
will also allow getting all the necessary views to measure the rims of relation with the nearby structures such as valves. In addition to 2DE
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1261
Figure 19 Imaging of IAS by 3D TOE. RATLe-90 Manoeuvre.108Image acquisition: Starting by 2D-mid-oesophageal 90° bicaval view (A), activate the
3D-zoom mode. The zoom box should be optimized to include the openings of the SVC, IVC, and Ao, with enough depth to include the whole IAS from
both atrial perspectives excluding extra atrial tissues (B). Then, acquiring this volume by clicking 3D-zoom button again will produce a truncated volume
with the SVC (arrow head) pointing to the right of the screen, IVC pointing to the left, left atrial perspective of the IAS is up, and right atrial perspective is
down (C). Manoeuvre: Rotate this volume anticlockwise for 90° around the z-axis to have the SVC pointing superiorly (arrow head) and the IVC point-
ing inferiorly (D). Tilt-left this volume for 90° around the y-axis to have the anatomically oriented ‘en-face’ view of the IAS from the RA perspective (E).
Ao, aortic root; IVC, inferior vena cava; SVC, superior vena cava.
Figure 20 3D TOE assessment of PFO. (A) 2D Mid-oesophageal bicaval view, showing a PFO with left-to-right shunt. (B) 3D-TEE zoomed volume
for the IAS from the Rt. Atrial side showing no defect. (C) 3D-TEE zoomed volume for the IAS from the Lt. Atrial side showing a small defect during
stretching of the PFO.
imaging, 3DE can provide the informative ‘en-face’ view of the ventricu- • Accurate assessment of defect morphology, position, size, and rims;
lar septum and help with assessment of shape, location, relation to • Evaluation of suitability for percutaneous defect closure; and
nearby structures, and navigation during interventional closure
(Figure 27; Supplementary data online, Video S26).116–120It also allows • Interventional guidance of defect closure procedures.
accurate sizing of the defect through the MPR tool. In addition, 3DE is emerging tool for accurate assessment of Qp/Qs.
Summary Other lesions
3DE imaging of the pre-tricuspid or/and post-tricuspid defects should As 3DE can provide ‘en-face’ view of any structure of interest, it can be
be used for the following: very useful in delineating intra-atrial obstruction due to the membranous
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1262 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 21 3D TOE assessment of secundum ASD. (A) Mid-oesophageal bicaval view shows an ostium secundum ASD (arrowhead) in the middle of
the IAS. (B) 3D-TOE ‘en-face’ view of the IAS from the right atrial aspect shows the same defect in A at the middle of the IAS. (C) Modified mid-
oesophageal bicaval view shows a high ostium secundum ASD (arrowhead) in the superior part of the IAS. (D) 3D-TOE ‘en-face’ view of the IAS
from the right atrial aspect shows the same defect in C the superior part of the IAS.
Figure 22 3D TOE assessment of IAS in a patient with partial AVSD. (A) 2D mid-oesophageal RV-focused view, showing both an ostium primum
ASD (arrowhead) and a small ostium secundum ASD (arrow). Note the absence of usual offset of the AV valves. (B) 3D TOE zoomed volume rendering
for the IAS from the right atrial side showing a small ostium secundum ASD and a large ostium primum ASD.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1263
Figure 23 Superior sinus venosus ASD. (A) Mid-oesophageal bicaval view shows a sinus venosus ASD (arrowhead) SVC type within the vicinity of the
SVC; colour compare shows a left-to-right shunt. (B) 3D-TOE ‘en-face’ view of the IAS from the right atrial aspect shows the same defect in A.
Figure 24 Coronary sinus ASD. (A) 2D mid-oesophageal commissural view showing an unroofed CS. (B) 2D mid-oesophageal modified bicaval view
showing an unroofed CS with a shunt from the LA to the CS and then into the RA. (C) 3D-TOE live narrow-sector view of the mid-oesophageal four-
chamber view showing the unroofing of the coronary sinus with direct communication between the LA and the CS. CS, coronary sinus; LA, left atrium;
RA, right atrium.
type of structure. In a patient with cor triatriatum, 3DE helps to assess (although visualization of very small and highly mobile vegetations may
the size and exact location of the defect on the membrane and severity be challenging due to the lower temporal resolution of 3DE compared
of obstruction (Figure 28; Supplementary data online, Videos S27–S29). with 2DE) and evaluation of the size and location of root or annulus ab-
Similarly, in patients with subaortic stenosis due to subaortic membrane scess (Figure 29; Supplementary data online, Video S30). Finally, 3DE may
or ridge, 3DE is a useful tool in demonstrating the size of the exact orifice. aid with morphological assessments of surgically created baffles or con-
In a patient with endocarditis, 3DE is useful in assessing the location, size of duits in patients with good acoustic window and has a potential to better
the vegetations, and their relation to the adjacent cardiac structure appreciate complications, such as the presence of thrombi.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1264 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 25 Quantification of ASD by 3D TOE. Sizing of the ASD and its rims using MPR mode analysis of the 3D data set, by aligning the MPR lines at
the edges of the defect rims to get an en-face short-axis view of the defect after choosing the time frame that shows the largest dimensions.
Figure 26 Periprocedural guidance for ASD closure. (A) 3D-TOE zoomed volume for the IAS from the Rt. Atrial side and Lt atrial aspect showing the
catheter (arrow) coming from the IVC and crossing the ASD. (B) 3D-TOE zoomed volume for the IAS from the Rt. Atrial side and Lt atrial aspect
showing the Amplatzer device (*) covering the ASD without obstructing the IVC or the CS. CS, coronary sinus; IVC, inferior vena cava.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1265
Figure 27 3DE assessment of the muscular VSD by TTE.
Figure 28 3DE assessment of cor triatriatum by TTE. (A, B) 3D volume rendering of the left atrium and LV demonstrating location of the membrane
in long axis view. (C, D) En-face view of the membrane in the left atrium with residual orifice allowing for communication between upper and lower parts
of the left atrium, displayed from two different perspectives. (E) Flexi-slice function allowing for direct 3D quantification of the orifice size. (F) 3D
Colour data acquisition demonstrating blood flow through the orifice in the left atrium membrane, hence ensuring that this is a true orifice and
not a drop-out artefact.
Training requirements of dedicated training, contingent on the individual’s prior experience,
and the intensity of the training programme. While there are no clear
To achieve expertise in 3DE in ACHD, a structured and complete recommendations in place for 3DE training in ACHD, we suggest a
training strategy is necessary. Healthcare professionals require sub- period of 12 months in a high-volume ACHD centre, with the possi-
stantive knowledge regarding CHD, surgical and percutaneous inter- bility to compare 3DE images and measurements with data obtained
ventions, together with a strong background in 2DE in CHD and by CMR, computer tomography, or with the surgical findings, and ex-
the techniques involved. A conservative estimate for healthcare pro- perienced mentorship for comprehensive ACHD echocardiographic
fessionals to attain proficiency in general 3DE is around 6–12 months training.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1266 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
Figure 29 3DE imaging of the aortic root abscess (arrow) in a patient with infective endocarditis of the bioprosthetic aortic valve.
Future perspectives is nowadays the only imaging modality able to display cardiac structures
in 3D in the beating heart (e.g. valve leaflets and chordae) and visualize
The use of 3DE in ACHD has the potential to bring about breakthroughs their relations with surrounding structures (e.g. VSD and LVOT).
that will improve diagnosis accuracy and the quality of care provided to pa- The added value of 3DE in ACHD lies in its impact on diagnostic pre-
tients. In the context of ACHD, it is anticipated that the spatial and temporal cision particularly relevant to more complex CHD patients, many with
resolution of 3DE imaging will continue to increase as a result of ongoing multiple previous interventions, interventional and surgical assessment
technological improvements in this field. These include advancements in ma- and planning, interventional guidance, postinterventional evaluation,
trix array transducers and real-time volumetric acquisition. Enhancement in and overall patient care. The ability of 3DE to provide detailed, real-
spatial and temporal resolution will facilitate more accurate assessment of time, and dynamic images of complex cardiac structures contributes
complex cardiac anatomy and functional abnormalities, allowing for better to a comprehensive understanding of ACHD anatomy and cardiac func-
management, interventional and surgical planning, and postoperative evalu- tion. In addition, 3DE is emerging as an accurate technique to measure
ation. Additionally, the integration of artificial intelligence algorithms for Qp/Qs. As technological innovations continue to unfold, with ongoing
automatic image analysis and interpretation, including flow quantification advancements in spatial and temporal resolution, as well as the integra-
for valve assessment, and the incorporation of 3D printing technology, vir- tion of artificial intelligence and 3D printing technologies, 3DE stands as
tual reality, or holographic models for personalized reconstruction of beat- a valuable tool in the multidisciplinary approach to managing the com-
ing cardiac models could change preoperative planning and patient plexities of ACHD.
education. Emerging research and clinical studies in this field are crucial for
evaluation of the role of 3DE in reducing diagnostic errors in CHD, health
economics impact of 3DE use, prognostic significance of 3DE-derived para- Supplementary data
meters in specific CHD, and role of 3DE in improving interventional results
(including complication rates, radiation exposure, or material-associated Supplementary data are available at European Heart Journal -
costs). This will facilitate wider inclusion of 3DE into clinical and procedural Cardiovascular Imaging online.
guidelines and further expand its potential for patients with CHD.
Funding
Conclusion
None declared.
3DE is an easily obtainable, inexpensive, and valuable tool to delineate Conflict of interest: E.S. is an employee and a shareholder of
the individual unique CHD morphology and haemodynamic status. 3DE AstraZeneca and has received speaker fees from GE HealthCare and
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1267
123sonography. D.M. declares consultancy, research support, and speaker 19.Riehle TJ, Mahle WT, Parks WJ, Sallee D III, Fyfe DA. Real-time three-dimensional
fees from GE Healthcare, Philips Medical Systems, and Bristol Meyers echocardiographic acquisition and quantification of left ventricular indices in children
Squibb. A.v.d.B. is a member of the ERN GUARD HEART for rare cardiac and young adults with congenital heart disease: comparison with magnetic resonance
imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2008;21:78–83.
diseases. H.M.E. has received speaker fees from Philips/TOMTEC Imaging.
20.Yanagi Y, Amano M, Tamai Y, Mizumoto A, Nakagawa S, Moriuchi K et al. Accuracy of
Other co-authors have nothing to declare.
shunt volume measured by three-dimensional echocardiography and cardiac magnetic
resonance in patients with an atrial septal defect and a dilated right ventricle. J Am Soc
Data availability
Echocardiogr 2024;37:797–805.
21.Michel M, Shabanah W, Körperich H, Kelter-Klöpping A, Entenmann A. Left ventricu-
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this research.
lar mass estimation by real-time 3D echocardiography favourably competes with CMR
in congenital left ventricular disease. Sci Rep 2019;9:11888.
References 22.van den Bosch AE, Robbers-Visser D, Krenning BJ, McGhie JS, Helbing WA, Meijboom
FJ et al. Comparison of real-time three-dimensional echocardiography to magnetic res-
1.Marelli AJ, Ionescu-Ittu R, Mackie AS, Guo L, Dendukuri N, Kaouache M. Lifetime
onance imaging for assessment of left ventricular mass. Am J Cardiol 2006;97:113–7.
prevalence of congenital heart disease in the general population from 2000 to 2010.
23.Kapetanakis S, Kearney MT, Siva A, Gall N, Cooklin M, Monaghan MJ. Real-time three-
Circulation 2014;130:749–56.
dimensional echocardiography: a novel technique to quantify global left ventricular
2.Diller GP, Dimopoulos K, Okonko D, Li W, Babu-Narayan SV, Broberg CS et al.
mechanical dyssynchrony. Circulation 2005;112:992–1000.
Exercise intolerance in adult congenital heart disease: comparative severity, correlates,
24.Leibundgut G, Rohner A, Grize L, Bernheim A, Kessel-Schaefer A, Bremerich J et al.
and prognostic implication. Circulation 2005;112:828–35.
Dynamic assessment of right ventricular volumes and function by real-time three-
3.Faletra FF, Agricola E, Flachskampf FA, Hahn R, Pepi M, Ajmone Marsan N et al.
Three-dimensional transoesophageal echocardiography: how to use and when to dimensional echocardiography: a comparison study with magnetic resonance imaging
use-a clinical consensus statement from the European Association of Cardiovascular in 100 adult patients. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:116–26.
Imaging of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2023; 25.Zhang QB, Sun JP, Gao RF, Lee AP, Feng YL, Liu XR et al. Feasibility of single-beat full-
24:e119–97. volume capture real-time three-dimensional echocardiography for quantification of
4.Simpson JM, van den Bosch A. Educational series in congenital heart disease: three- right ventricular volume: validation by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Int J
dimensional echocardiography in congenital heart disease. Echo Res Pract 2019;6: Cardiol 2013;168:3991–5.
R75–86. 26.Muraru D, Spadotto V, Cecchetto A, Romeo G, Aruta P, Ermacora D et al. New
5.Jiang Y. Improving the diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart disease through the speckle-tracking algorithm for right ventricular volume analysis from three-
combination of three-dimensional echocardiography and image guided surgery. BMC dimensional echocardiographic data sets: validation with cardiac magnetic resonance
Med Imaging 2024;24:61. and comparison with the previous analysis tool. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;
6.Saraç İ, Birdal O. Perioperative assessment and clinical outcomes of percutaneous at- 17:1279–89.
rial septal defect closure with three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography. 27.Namisaki H, Nabeshima Y, Kitano T, Otani K, Takeuchi M. Prognostic value of the right
Diagnostics (Basel) 2024;14:1755. ventricular ejection fraction, assessed by fully automated three-dimensional echocar-
7.Doan TT, Pignatelli RH, Parekh DR, Parthiban A. Imaging and guiding intervention for diography: a direct comparison of analyses using right ventricular-focused views versus
tricuspid valve disorders using 3-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography in apical four-chamber views. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2021;34:117–26.
pediatric and congenital heart disease. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2023;39:1855–64. 28.Sugeng L, Mor-Avi V, Weinert L, Niel J, Ebner C, Steringer-Mascherbauer R et al.
8.Sun F, Sun A, Chen Y, Xiao Y, Zhang X, Qiao W et al. Novel TrueVue series of 3D Multimodality comparison of quantitative volumetric analysis of the right ventricle.
echocardiography: revealing the pathological morphology of congenital heart disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2010;3:10–8.
Front Physiol 2022;13:1000007. 29.Tamborini G, Marsan NA, Gripari P, Maffessanti F, Brusoni D, Muratori M et al.
9.Tekin M, Güler GB, Çiçek M, Tanboğa İH, Pysz P, Güler A et al. Optimizing device se- Reference values for right ventricular volumes and ejection fraction with real-time
lection in percutaneous paravalvular leak closure: a comparative study of different trans- three-dimensional echocardiography: evaluation in a large series of normal subjects.
thoracic and transesophageal echocardiographic techniques. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:109–15.
2025. Feb 20. doi: 10.1002/ccd.31448. Epub ahead of print. 30.Maffessanti F, Muraru D, Esposito R, Gripari P, Ermacora D, Santoro C et al. Age-, body
10.Simpson J, Lopez L, Acar P, Friedberg M, Khoo N, Ko H et al. Three-dimensional echo- size-, and sex-specific reference values for right ventricular volumes and ejection frac-
cardiography in congenital heart disease: an expert consensus document from the tion by three-dimensional echocardiography: a multicenter echocardiographic study in
European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society of 507 healthy volunteers. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:700–10.
Echocardiography. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;17:1071–97. 31.Pickett CA, Cheezum MK, Kassop D, Villines TC, Hulten EA. Accuracy of cardiac CT,
11.Yang HS, Lee KS, Chaliki HP, Tazelaar HD, Lusk JL, Chandrasekaran K et al. Anomalous
radionucleotide and invasive ventriculography, two- and three-dimensional echocardi-
insertion of the papillary muscle causing left ventricular outflow obstruction: visualization
ography, and SPECT for left and right ventricular ejection fraction compared with car-
by real-time three-dimensional echocardiography. Eur J Echocardiogr 2008;9:855–60.
diac MRI: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;16:848–52. 12.Li W, West C, McGhie J, van den Bosch AE, Babu-Narayan SV, Meijboom F et al.
32.Dissabandara T, Lin K, Forwood M, Sun J. Validating real-time three-dimensional echo-
Consensus recommendations for echocardiography in adults with congenital heart de-
cardiography against cardiac magnetic resonance, for the determination of ventricular
fects from the International Society of Adult Congenital Heart Disease (ISACHD). Int J
mass, volume and ejection fraction: a meta-analysis. Clin Res Cardiol 2024;113:367–92.
Cardiol 2018;272:77–83.
33.Selly JB, Iriart X, Roubertie F, Mauriat P, Marek J, Guilhon E et al. Multivariable assess-
13.Shimada YJ, Shiota T. A meta-analysis and investigation for the source of bias of left
ment of the right ventricle by echocardiography in patients with repaired tetralogy of
ventricular volumes and function by three-dimensional echocardiography in compari-
Fallot undergoing pulmonary valve replacement: a comparative study with magnetic
son with magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Cardiol 2011;107:126–38.
resonance imaging. Arch Cardiovasc Dis 2015;108:5–15.
14.Dorosz JL, Lezotte DC, Weitzenkamp DA, Allen LA, Salcedo EE. Performance of 3-di-
34.Trzebiatowska-Krzynska A, Swahn E, Wallby L, Nielsen NE, Carlhäll CJ, Engvall J.
mensional echocardiography in measuring left ventricular volumes and ejection frac-
Three-dimensional echocardiography to identify right ventricular dilatation in patients
tion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59:1799–808.
with corrected Fallot anomaly or pulmonary stenosis. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2021;
15.Lang RM, Badano LP, Mor-Avi V, Afilalo J, Armstrong A, Ernande L et al.
Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification by echocardiography in adults: 41:51–61.
an update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European 35.Grewal J, Majdalany D, Syed I, Pellikka P, Warnes CA. Three-dimensional echocardio-
Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;16:233–70. graphic assessment of right ventricular volume and function in adult patients with con-
16.van den Bosch AE, Robbers-Visser D, Krenning BJ, Voormolen MM, McGhie JS, Helbing genital heart disease: comparison with magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Soc
WA et al. Real-time transthoracic three-dimensional echocardiographic assessment of Echocardiogr 2010;23:127–33.
left ventricular volume and ejection fraction in congenital heart disease. J Am Soc 36.van der Zwaan HB, Helbing WA, McGhie JS, Geleijnse ML, Luijnenburg SE,
Echocardiogr 2006;19:1–6. Roos-Hesselink JW et al. Clinical value of real-time three-dimensional echocardiog-
17.Medvedofsky D, Mor-Avi V, Amzulescu M, Fernández-Golfín C, Hinojar R, Monaghan raphy for right ventricular quantification in congenital heart disease: validation with
MJ et al. Three-dimensional echocardiographic quantification of the left-heart cham- cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:134–40.
bers using an automated adaptive analytics algorithm: multicentre validation study. 37.Park JB, Lee SP, Lee JH, Yoon YE, Park EA, Kim HK et al. Quantification of right ven-
Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2018;19:47–58. tricular volume and function using single-beat three-dimensional echocardiography: a
18.Kamińska H, Małek ŁA, Barczuk-Falęcka M, Werner B. Usefulness of three-dimensional validation study with cardiac magnetic resonance. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2016;29:
echocardiography for assessment of left and right ventricular volumes in children, veri- 392–401.
fied by cardiac magnetic resonance. Can we overcome the discrepancy? Arch Med Sci 38.Hadeed K, Karsenty C, Ghenghea R, Dulac Y, Bruguiere E, Guitarte A et al. Bedside
2021;17:71–83. right ventricle quantification using three-dimensional echocardiography in children
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

1268 E . S u r k o v a e t a l.
with congenital heart disease: a comparative study with cardiac magnetic resonance echocardiography: comparison with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Eur Heart J
imaging. Arch Cardiovasc Dis 2024;117:633–8. Cardiovasc Imaging 2014;15:257–66.
39.Laser KT, Karabiyik A, Körperich H, Horst JP, Barth P, Kececioglu D et al. Validation 62.Femenia V, Pommier V, Huguet H, Iriart X, Picot MC, Bredy C et al. Correlation be-
and reference values for three-dimensional echocardiographic right ventricular volu- tween three-dimensional echocardiography and cardiopulmonary fitness in patients
metry in children: a multicenter study. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2018;31:1050–63. with univentricular heart: a cross-sectional multicentre prospective study. Arch
40.Ferraro AM, Bonello K, Sleeper LA, Lu M, Shea M, Marx GR et al. A comparison be- Cardiovasc Dis 2023;116:202–9.
tween the apical and subcostal view for three-dimensional echocardiographic assess- 63.Kutty S, Graney BA, Khoo NS, Li L, Polak A, Gribben P et al. Serial assessment of right
ment of right ventricular volumes in pediatric patients. Front Cardiovasc Med 2023;10: ventricular volume and function in surgically palliated hypoplastic left heart syndrome
1137814. using real-time transthoracic three-dimensional echocardiography. J Am Soc
41.Buck T, Franke A, Monaghan MJ. Three-Dimensional Echocardiography. Book. 2nd Echocardiogr 2012;25:682–9.
Edition. Berlin, Germany: Springer; 2015. 64.Rice K, Simpson J. Three-dimensional echocardiography of congenital abnormalities of
42.Surkova E, Muraru D, Genovese D, Aruta P, Palermo C, Badano LP. Relative prognos-
the left atrioventricular valve. Echo Res Pract 2015;2:R13–24.
tic importance of left and right ventricular ejection fraction in patients with cardiac dis- 65.Colen T, Smallhorn JF. Three-dimensional echocardiography for the assessment of
eases. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2019;32:1407–15.e3.
atrioventricular valves in congenital heart disease: past, present and future. Semin
43.Nagata Y, Wu VC, Kado Y, Otani K, Lin FC, Otsuji Y et al. Prognostic value of right
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu 2015;18:62–71.
ventricular ejection fraction assessed by transthoracic 3D echocardiography. Circ
66.Sugeng L, Weinert L, Lammertin G, Thomas P, Spencer KT, Decara JM et al. Accuracy
Cardiovasc Imaging 2017;10:e005384.
of mitral valve area measurements using transthoracic rapid freehand 3-dimensional
44.Surkova E, Kovács A. Contraction patterns of the right ventricle associated with differ-
scanning: comparison with noninvasive and invasive methods. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
ent degrees of left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Circulation Cardiovasc Imaging 2021;
2003;16:1292–300.
14:e012774.
67.Monteagudo Ruiz JM, Zamorano Gómez JL. The role of 2D and 3D echo in mitral sten-
45.Muraru D, Badano LP, Nagata Y, Surkova E, Nabeshima Y, Genovese D et al.
osis. J Cardiovasc Dev Dis 2021;8:171.
Development and prognostic validation of partition values to grade right ventricular
68.Bleakley C, Eskandari M, Aldalati O, Moschonas K, Huang M, Whittaker A et al. Impact
dysfunction severity using 3D echocardiography. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
of 3D echocardiography on grading of mitral stenosis and prediction of clinical events.
2020;21:10–21.
Echo Res Pract 2018;5:105–11.
46.Sayour AA, Tokodi M, Celeng C, Takx RAP, Fábián A, Lakatos BK et al. Association of
69.Messika-Zeitoun D, Brochet E, Holmin C, Rosenbaum D, Cormier B, Serfaty JM et al.
right ventricular functional parameters with adverse cardiopulmonary outcomes: a
meta-analysis. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2023;36:624–33.e8. Three-dimensional evaluation of the mitral valve area and commissural opening before
47.Vitarelli A, Miraldi F, Capotosto L, Galea N, Francone M, Marchitelli L et al. and after percutaneous mitral commissurotomy in patients with mitral stenosis. Eur
Comprehensive echocardiographic assessment of right ventricular function, pulmon- Heart J 2007;28:72–9.
ary arterial elastic properties and ventricular-vascular coupling in adult patients with 70.Narang A, Addetia K, Weinert L, Yamat M, Shah AP, Blair JE et al. Diagnosis of isolated
repaired tetralogy of Fallot: clinical significance of 3D derived indices. Int J Cardiovasc cleft mitral valve using three-dimensional echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
Imaging 2023;39:1631–41. 2018;31:1161–7.
48.Moceri P, Duchateau N, Baudouy D, Schouver E-D, Leroy S, Squara F et al. 71.Bornaun H, Katipoğlu Ç, Dedeoğlu S. Revealing mitral valve cleft using real-time 3-di-
Three-dimensional right-ventricular regional deformation and survival in pulmonary mensional echocardiography in children with mitral regurgitation. Pediatr Cardiol 2024;
hypertension. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2018;19:450–8. 45:660–5.
49.Bidviene J, Muraru D, Maffessanti F, Ereminiene E, Kovács A. Regional shape, global 72.Moura-Ferreira S, Sampaio F. A rare case series of mitral valve clefts diagnosed by 3D
function and mechanics in right ventricular volume and pressure overload conditions: echocardiography and mini-review of the literature. Echocardiography 2019;36:
a three-dimensional echocardiography study. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2021;37: 1203–7.
1289–99. 73.Kutty S, Colen TM, Smallhorn JF. Three-dimensional echocardiography in the assess-
50.Addetia K, Maffessanti F, Yamat M, Weinert L, Narang A, Freed BH et al. ment of congenital mitral valve disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2014;27:142–54.
Three-dimensional echocardiography-based analysis of right ventricular shape in pul- 74.Thavendiranathan P, Liu S, Datta S, Rajagopalan S, Ryan T, Igo SR et al. Quantification of
monary arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;17:564–75. chronic functional mitral regurgitation by automated 3-dimensional peak and inte-
51.Moceri P, Duchateau N, Gillon S, Jaunay L, Baudouy D, Squara F et al. grated proximal isovelocity surface area and stroke volume techniques using real-time
Three-dimensional right ventricular shape and strain in congenital heart disease pa- 3-dimensional volume color Doppler echocardiography: in vitro and clinical validation.
tients with right ventricular chronic volume loading. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:125–33.
2021;22:1174–81. 75.Dahou A, Levin D, Reisman M, Hahn RT. Anatomy and physiology of the tricuspid
52.Addetia K, Maffessanti F, Muraru D, Singh A, Surkova E, Mor-Avi V et al. Morphologic valve. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2019;12:458–68.
analysis of the normal right ventricle using three-dimensional echocardiography- 76.Muraru D, Hahn RT, Soliman OI, Faletra FF, Basso C, Badano LP. 3-dimensional echo-
derived curvature indices. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2018;31:614–23. cardiography in imaging the tricuspid valve. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2019;12:500–15.
53.Iriart X, Roubertie F, Jalal Z, Thambo JB. Quantification of systemic right ventricle by 77.Takahashi K, Mackie AS, Rebeyka IM, Ross DB, Robertson M, Dyck JD et al.
echocardiography. Arch Cardiovasc Dis 2016;109:120–7.
Two-dimensional versus transthoracic real-time three-dimensional echocardiography
54.Baroutidou A, Ntiloudi D, Kasinos N, Nyktari E, Giannakoulas G. Multi-modality im-
in the evaluation of the mechanisms and sites of atrioventricular valve regurgitation in a
aging of the systemic right ventricle in congenital heart disease. Echocardiography
congenital heart disease population. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:726–34.
2024;41:e15749.
78.Jani V, Li L, Craft M, Veronesi F, Khoo N, Danford D et al. Semi-automated quantifi-
55.Surkova E, Kovács A. Contraction patterns of the systemic right ventricle: a three-
cation of tricuspid valve dynamics and structure in tetralogy of Fallot and hypoplastic
dimensional echocardiography study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2022;23:1654–62.
left heart syndrome using three-dimensional echocardiography. Echo Res Pract 2023;
56.Schneider M, Beichl M, Nietsche C, Beitzke D, Porenta G, Beran G et al. Systematic
10:10.
evaluation of systemic right ventricular function. J Clin Med 2019;9:107.
79.Sabatino J, Bassareo PP, Ciliberti P, Cazzoli I, Oreto L, Secinaro A et al. Tricuspid valve
57.Kutty S, Li L, Polak A, Gribben P, Danford DA. Echocardiographic knowledge-based
in congenital heart disease: multimodality imaging and electrophysiological considera-
reconstruction for quantification of the systemic right ventricle in young adults with
tions. Minerva Cardiol Angiol 2022;70:491–501.
repaired D-transposition of great arteries. Am J Cardiol 2012;109:881–8.
80.Hahn RT, Thomas JD, Khalique OK, Cavalcante JL, Praz F, Zoghbi WA. Imaging assess-
58.Zhong SW, Zhang YQ, Chen LJ, Wang SS, Li WH. Evaluation of left ventricular vo-
lumes and function by real time three-dimensional echocardiography in children ment of tricuspid regurgitation severity. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2019;12:469–90.
with functional single left ventricle: a comparison between QLAB and TomTec. 81.Yang HS. Three-dimensional echocardiography in adult congenital heart disease.
Echocardiography (Mount Kisco, NY) 2015;32:1554–63. Korean J Intern Med 2017;32:577–88.
59.Zhong S-W, Zhang Y-Q, Chen L-J, Zhang Z-F, Wu L-P, Hong W-J. Ventricular function 82.Gellis L, McGeoghegan P, Lu M, Feins E, Sleeper L, Emani S et al. Left atrioventricular
and dyssynchrony in children with a functional single right ventricle using real time valve repair after primary atrioventricular canal surgery: predictors of durability. J
three-dimensional echocardiography after fontan operation. Echocardiography 2021; Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2023;166:1168–77.
38:1218–27. 83.McGeoghegan PB, Lu M, Sleeper LA, Emani SM, Baird CW, Feins EN et al. Cleft closure
60.Soriano BD, Hoch M, Ithuralde A, Geva T, Powell AJ, Kussman BD et al. Matrix-array and other predictors of contemporary outcomes after atrioventricular canal repair in
3-dimensional echocardiographic assessment of volumes, mass, and ejection fraction in patients with parachute left atrioventricular valve. Interdiscip Cardiovasc Thorac Surg
young pediatric patients with a functional single ventricle: a comparison study with car- 2024;38:ivae048.
diac magnetic resonance. Circulation 2008;117:1842–8. 84.Muraru D, Badano LP, Vannan M, Iliceto S. Assessment of aortic valve complex by
61.Bell A, Rawlins D, Bellsham-Revell H, Miller O, Razavi R, Simpson J. Assessment of right three-dimensional echocardiography: a framework for its effective application in clin-
ventricular volumes in hypoplastic left heart syndrome by real-time three-dimensional ical practice. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2012;13:541–55.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

3DE in ACHD 1269
85.Rong LQ, Hameed I, Salemi A, Rahouma M, Khan FM, Wijeysundera HC et al. 101. Taskesen T, Gill EA. Pulmonary valve assessment by three-dimensional echocardiog-
Three-dimensional echocardiography for transcatheter aortic valve replacement siz- raphy. Echocardiography 2022;39:1001–9.
ing: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc 2019;8:e013463. 102. Miranda WR, Connolly HM, Bonnichsen CR, DeSimone DC, Dearani JA, Maleszewski
86.Espinola-Zavaleta N, Muñoz-Castellanos L, Attié F, Hernández-Morales G, JJ et al. Prosthetic pulmonary valve and pulmonary conduit endocarditis: clinical, micro-
Zamora-González C, Dueñas-Carbajal R et al. Anatomic three-dimensional echocar- biological and echocardiographic features in adults. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;
diographic correlation of bicuspid aortic valve. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2003;16:46–53. 17:936–43.
87.Zoghbi WA, Adams D, Bonow RO, Enriquez-Sarano M, Foster E, Grayburn PA et al. 103. Truscelli G, Gaudio C. Papillary fibroelastoma of the pulmonary valve-a systematic re-
Recommendations for noninvasive evaluation of native valvular regurgitation: a report view: advantages of live/real time three-dimensional transthoracic and transesophageal
from the American Society of Echocardiography developed in collaboration with the echocardiography. Echocardiography 2014;31:795–6.
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2017;30: 104. Bhatia A. Transesophageal echocardiography evaluation of tricuspid and pulmonic
303–71. valves. Ann Card Anaesth 2016;19(Supplement):S21–5.
88.Cai Q, Ahmad M. Three-dimensional echocardiography in valvular heart disease. 105. Pothineni KR, Wells BJ, Hsiung MC, Nanda NC, Yelamanchili P, Suwanjutah T et al.
Echocardiography 2012;29:88–97. Live/real time three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic assessment of pul-
89.Yanagi Y, Kanzaki H. Diagnostic value of vena contracta area measurement using three- monary regurgitation. Echocardiography 2008;25:911–7.
dimensional transesophageal echocardiography in assessing the severity of aortic re- 106. Anderson RH, Brown NA, Webb S. Development and structure of the atrial septum.
gurgitation. Echocardiography 2021;38:1307–13. Heart 2002;88:104–10.
90.Lancellotti P, Pibarot P. Multi-modality imaging assessment of native valvular regurgi- 107. Saric M, Perk G, Purgess JR, Kronzon I. Imaging atrial septal defects by real-time three-
tation: an EACVI and ESC council of valvular heart disease position paper. Eur Heart dimensional transesophageal echocardiography: step-by-step approach. J Am Soc
J Cardiovasc Imaging 2022;23:e171–232. Echocardiogr 2010;23:1128–35.
91.Reynolds HR, Jagen MA, Tunick PA, Kronzon I. Sensitivity of transthoracic versus 108. Mahmoud HM, Al-Ghamdi MA, Ghabashi AE, Anwar AM. A proposed maneuver to
transesophageal echocardiography for the detection of native valve vegetations in guide transseptal puncture using real-time three-dimensional transesophageal echo-
the modern era. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2003;16:67–70. cardiography: pilot study. Cardiol Res Pract 2015;2015:174051.
92.Doherty JU, Kort S, Mehran R, Schoenhagen P, Soman P, Dehmer GJ et al. ACC/AATS/ 109. Silvestry FE, Cohen MS, Armsby LB, Burkule NJ, Fleishman CE, Hijazi ZM et al.
AHA/ASE/ASNC/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2017 appropriate use criteria for mul- Guidelines for the echocardiographic assessment of atrial septal defect and patent for-
timodality imaging in valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of amen ovale: from the American Society of Echocardiography and Society for Cardiac
Cardiology appropriate use criteria task force, American Association for Thoracic Angiography and Interventions. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2015;28:910–58.
Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, 110. Roberson DA, Cui VW. Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography of at-
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for rial septal defect device closure. Curr Cardiol Rep 2014;16:453.
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed 111. Brida M, Chessa M, Celermajer D, Li W, Geva T, Khairy P et al. Atrial septal defect in
Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of adulthood: a new paradigm for congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J 2022;43:2660–71.
Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2018;31:381–404. 112. Thangaroopan M, Truong QA, Kalra MK, Yared K, Abbara S. Images in cardiovascular
93.Zamorano JL, Badano LP, Bruce C, Chan KL, Gonçalves A, Hahn RT et al. EAE/ASE medicine. Rare case of an unroofed coronary sinus: diagnosis by multidetector com-
recommendations for the use of echocardiography in new transcatheter interventions puted tomography. Circulation 2009;119:e518–20.
for valvular heart disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2011;24:937–65. 113. Roushdy A, El Sayegh A, Ali YA, Attia H, El Fiky A, El Sayed M. A novel three-
94.Alli OO, Hsiung MC, Guvenc T, Neill J, Elguindy M, Ahmed MI et al. Incremental value of dimensional echocardiographic method for device size selection in patients undergoing
three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography over the two-dimensional tech- ASD trans-catheter closure. Egypt Heart J 2019;72:1.
nique in percutaneous closure of aortic paraprosthetic regurgitation. Echocardiography 114. Jone PN, Zablah JE, Burkett DA, Schäfer M, Wilson N, Morgan GJ et al.
2014;31:1154–8. Three-dimensional echocardiographic guidance of right heart catheterization de-
95.Galderisi M, Cosyns B, Edvardsen T, Cardim N, Delgado V, Di Salvo G et al. creases radiation exposure in atrial septal defect closures. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
Standardization of adult transthoracic echocardiography reporting in agreement 2018;31:1044–9.
with recent chamber quantification, diastolic function, and heart valve disease recom- 115. Deng B, Chen K, Huang T, Wei Y, Liu Y, Yang L et al. Assessment of atrial septal defect
mendations: an expert consensus document of the European Association of using 2D or real-time 3D transesophageal echocardiography and outcomes following
Cardiovascular Imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2017;18:1301–10. transcatheter closure. Ann Transl Med 2021;9:1309.
96.Machida T, Izumo M, Suzuki K, Yoneyama K, Kamijima R, Mizukoshi K et al. Value of 116. Dall’Agata A, Cromme-Dijkhuis AH, Meijboom FJ, McGhie JS, Bol-Raap G, Nosir YF
anatomical aortic valve area using real-time three-dimensional transoesophageal echo- et al. Three-dimensional echocardiography enhances the assessment of ventricular
cardiography in patients with aortic stenosis: a comparison between tricuspid and bi- septal defect. Am J Cardiol 1999;83:1576–9, A8.
cuspid aortic valves. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;16:1120–8. 117. Cossor W, Cui VW, Roberson DA. Three-dimensional echocardiographic en face
97.Hadeed K, Hascoët S, Amadieu R, Dulac Y, Breinig S, Cazavet A et al. 3D transthoracic views of ventricular septal defects: feasibility, accuracy, imaging protocols and refer-
echocardiography to assess pulmonary valve morphology and annulus size in patients ence image collectionJ Am Soc Echocardiogr 2015;28:1020–9.
with tetralogy of Fallot. Arch Cardiovasc Dis 2016;109:87–95. 118. Ishii M, Hashino K, Eto G, Tsutsumi T, Himeno W, Sugahara Y et al. Quantitative as-
98.Anwar AM, Soliman O, van den Bosch AE, McGhie JS, Geleijnse ML, ten Cate FJ et al. sessment of severity of ventricular septal defect by three-dimensional reconstruction
Assessment of pulmonary valve and right ventricular outflow tract with real-time of color Doppler-imaged vena contracta and flow convergence region. Circulation
three-dimensional echocardiography. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2007;23:167–75. 2001;103:664–9.
99.Kemaloğlu Öz T, Özpamuk Karadeniz F, Akyüz Ş, Ünal Dayı Ş, Esen Zencirci A, Atasoy I 119. Rivera JM, Siu SC, Handschumacher MD, Lethor JP, Guerrero JL, Vlahakes GJ et al.
et al. The advantages of live/real time three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiog- Three-dimensional reconstruction of ventricular septal defects: validation studies
raphy during assessments of pulmonary stenosis. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;32: and in vivo feasibility. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;23:201–8.
573–82. 120. Balzer J, van Hall S, Rassaf T, Böring YC, Franke A, Lang RM et al. Feasibility, safety, and
100. Lang RM, Badano LP, Tsang W, Adams DH, Agricola E, Buck T et al. EAE/ASE recom- efficacy of real-time three-dimensional transoesophageal echocardiography for guiding
mendations for image acquisition and display using three-dimensional echocardiog- device closure of interatrial communications: initial clinical experience and impact on
raphy. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2012;25:3–46. radiation exposure. Eur J Echocardiogr 2010;11:1–8.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026
