=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "laparoscopic-repair-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm-pdf-1899865283911621.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:47.848194",
  "file_size_bytes": 66868,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/laparoscopic-repair-of-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm-pdf-1899865283911621.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Laparoscopic repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 22 August 2007
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg229
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 2 ---
Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG229)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Guidance
1.1 There is adequate evidence of the safety and efficacy of laparoscopic repair of
abdominal aortic aneurysm, but the technical demands are such that this
procedure should not be used without special arrangements for consent and for
audit or research.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to undertake laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm
should take the following actions.
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their Trusts.
• Ensure that patients understand the procedure and its place in the elective
treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysm. They should provide patients with
clear, written information. In addition, the patient should be informed of other
available techniques, and told that conversion to open surgery may be
necessary. Use of NICE's information for the public is recommended.
1.3 Clinicians undertaking this procedure should submit data on all patients to the
National Vascular Database held by the Vascular Society.
1.4 Selection of patients should be performed by a multidisciplinary team
experienced in the management of aortic aneurysms and able to offer alternative
treatment options.
1.5 This procedure should be performed by vascular surgeons who have had training
in advanced laparoscopic surgery, and are mentored in these techniques.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 3 ---
Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG229)
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Dilatation of the aorta forming an aneurysm occurs in about 2% of men over the
age of 65 (it is less common in women). Small aneurysms may present no
problems, but some continue to grow, and larger aneurysms can leak or rupture.
This carries a high risk of mortality, even when it is possible to offer emergency
surgery. Preventive treatment is often advised for patients with aneurysms that
represent an appreciable rupture risk.
2.1.2 The traditional treatment for abdominal aortic aneurysm is open surgical repair.
The aneurysm is opened and a graft is then sewn in above and below the
weakened area to allow normal blood flow. A less invasive approach is now
commonly used, involving endovascular stent graft placement via the femoral
arteries, but not all aneurysms are suitable for endovascular treatment.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm can be done by hand-assisted
laparoscopic surgery (HALS) or by the technically more demanding totally
laparoscopic surgery (TLS). In HALS, a midline minilaparotomy incision is made
for insertion of one of the surgeon's hands to aid the procedure. In both
techniques, small skin incisions are made for insertion of a laparoscope and
instruments to guide and/or perform the repair. Lumbar arteries and the inferior
mesenteric artery are dissected and clipped. Clamps are applied above and
below the aneurysm, the sac is opened and thrombus removed. A prosthetic
vascular graft is anastomosed to the proximal and distal ends of the aorta. The
aneurysm wall and the posterior parietal peritoneum may be closed to cover the
graft.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 4 ---
Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG229)
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 In three non-randomised controlled trials, mean hospital length of stay (LOS) was
5.9 (HALS), 6.2 and 6.3 (TLS) days, compared with 9.4, 10.0 and 10.2 days
following open repair. One non-randomised controlled study reported that mean
LOS was broadly similar following HALS (7.4 days) and endovascular stenting
(6.4 days).
2.3.2 In one case series, mean LOS was 5 days for TLS (n=131) and 7 days for HALS
(n=215). In a second case series, mean LOS for HALS was reported as 4.4 days.
There was a statistically significant difference in mean LOS between the first 30
patients (5.3 days) and the last 92 patients (4.1 days) treated at one institution
(p=0.001). For more details, see the overview.
2.3.3 All Specialist Advisers considered this procedure to be novel and of uncertain
efficacy. They considered key efficacy outcomes for this procedure to be
successful complete repair, open conversion rates, operative time, intensive care
unit and overall hospital LOS, patient quality of life, renal function and need for
return to theatre. Some Specialist Advisers suggested that there would be longer
operating times, particularly early in the learning curve.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 Postoperative death rates following laparoscopic aneurysm repair have been
reported as 3% (1 out of 29) and 4% (1 out of 24; HALS), and 5% (3 out of 60) and
10% (2 out of 20; TLS).
2.4.2 One non-randomised controlled trial reported that the rate of renal insufficiency
was 2% (1 out of 60) following laparoscopic repair compared with 11% (11 out of
100) following open repair. Other complications reported following laparoscopic
aneurysm repair include bleeding from the hypogastric artery in <1% (1 out of
122; HALS) and bleeding requiring reoperation in 2% (1 out of 60; TLS).
2.4.3 In three non-randomised controlled trials that compared laparoscopic aneurysm
repair with open surgery, the mean operative time was longer in the laparoscopic
(181 [HALS], 462 and 468 minutes [TLS]) than in the open surgery groups (136,
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 5 ---
Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG229)
300 and 301 minutes, respectively; significance not reported). A fourth non-
randomised controlled study comparing HALS with endovascular stenting
reported that mean operative time was longer in the HALS group (198 and
149 minutes, respectively; not statistically significant).
2.4.4 In one case series mean operative time was 257 minutes with HALS; in another it
was 175 minutes with HALS and 265 minutes with TLS. For more details, see the
overview.
2.4.5 Safety outcomes highlighted by the Specialist Advisers were death within
30 days and late mortality, and major complications such as blood loss, infection,
and multiple organ failure. They all agreed that the safety of this novel procedure
is uncertain and that advanced training in laparoscopic surgical techniques is
important.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 It was noted that the different laparoscopic techniques have differing technical
demands and training requirements. The Committee considered that total cross-
clamp time and long-term graft performance are important outcome measures.
3 Further information
3.1 NICE has issued interventional procedures guidance on stent-graft placement in
abdominal aortic aneurysm and endovascular stent-graft placement in thoracic
aortic aneurysms and dissections.
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 6 ---
Laparoscopic repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG229)
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the decision made, and has been written with patient consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6256-3
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
