=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "laser-sheath-removal-of-pacing-leads-pdf-52774278744517.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:04.207938",
  "file_size_bytes": 59057,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/laser-sheath-removal-of-pacing-leads-pdf-52774278744517.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Laser sheath removal of pacing
leads
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 23 June 2004
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg63
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with

Laser sheath removal of pacing leads (IPG63)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of laser sheath removal of pacing
leads appears adequate to support the use of this procedure provided that the
normal arrangements are in place for consent, audit and clinical governance.
1.2 Laser sheath removal of pacing leads should be used only in patients for whom
standard methods of removal are ineffective.
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 This procedure is used to remove pacemaker leads that have been in place for a
few months. Pacemaker leads may need to be removed or changed if they
malfunction, cause heart rhythm problems or become infected. If the leads have
been in place for more than a few months they can become tightly attached by
scar tissue to the heart and to the veins through which they pass, making
removal difficult and risky. This procedure may also be used to remove
defibrillator leads.
2.1.2 The conventional technique for removing pacing leads involves inserting locking
stylets and telescoping sheaths around the pacing leads to separate them from
the surrounding scar tissue. If this fails, open chest surgery may be required.
Alternatively, in some cases, the leads may be detached from the pacemaker unit
and simply left inside the patient.

Laser sheath removal of pacing leads (IPG63)
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Laser sheaths are similar to standard extraction sheaths, but vaporise rather than
tear the scar tissue surrounding the pacing leads. The use of laser sheaths
involves passing a double-layered sheath over the pacing leads. The inner layer
of the sheath is made from fibre-optic material that transmits a laser beam; the
outer layer is more rigid. The double-layered sheath is passed slowly over the
lead and laser energy vaporises the scar tissue around the lead as the sheath is
advanced over it. When scar tissue has been vaporised up to a point near the
heart, the more rigid outer sheath is advanced to provide countertraction for
removal of the pacing lead.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 In the studies reviewed, complete lead removal ranged from 89% (596 out of 671
leads) to 98% (44 out of 45 leads). In a randomised controlled trial, complete lead
removal was 94% (230 out of 244 leads) for patients in the laser group and 64%
(142 out of 221 leads) for patients in the non-laser group. In the same study,
mean operation time per lead was 11 minutes in the laser group compared with 15
minutes in the non-laser group (p<0.04). For more details, see the overview.
2.3.2 The Specialist Advisors had no concerns about the efficacy of this procedure.
They considered it to be at least as efficacious as, and probably more efficacious
than, standard techniques.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 In a randomised controlled trial, 3 of 153 patients randomised to laser sheath
removal required subsequent surgery (two patients required a thoracotomy and
one patient required a chest tube). One patient later died after a cardiac
tamponade, but this was not directly related to the use of laser energy. In the
largest case series, major complications (defined as cardiac tamponade,
haemothorax, pulmonary embolism, lead migration and death) were observed in
2% (31 out of 1,684) of patients, and 1% (13 out of 1,684) of patients died in

Laser sheath removal of pacing leads (IPG63)
hospital. For more details, see the overview.
2.4.2 The Specialist Advisors considered the complications of laser sheath removal of
pacing leads to be similar to those of standard extraction techniques. They
commented on the small risk of cardiac tamponade caused by rupture of major
veins or the myocardium, and noted that this could result in the need for
emergency surgery and, in some cases, cause death.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 Removal of pacing leads can cause serious complications, requiring cardiac
surgery, regardless of the extraction technique used.
3 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6199-3
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
