=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "leadless-cardiac-pacemaker-implantation-for-bradyarrhythmias-pdf-1899873986002117.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:48.045465",
  "file_size_bytes": 67636,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/leadless-cardiac-pacemaker-implantation-for-bradyarrhythmias-pdf-1899873986002117.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker
implantation for
bradyarrhythmias
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 29 August 2018
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg626
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 2 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias (IPG626)
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Evidence on the safety of leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for
bradyarrhythmias shows that there are serious but well-recognised
complications. The evidence on efficacy is inadequate in quantity and
quality:
• For people who can have conventional cardiac pacemaker implantation,
leadless pacemakers should only be used in the context of research. Find out
what only in research means on the NICE interventional procedures guidance
page.
• For people in whom a conventional cardiac pacemaker implantation is
contraindicated following a careful risk assessment by a multidisciplinary team,
leadless cardiac pacemakers should only be used with special arrangements
for clinical governance, consent and audit or research. Find out what special
arrangements mean on the NICE interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to do leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for
bradyarrhythmias in people who cannot have conventional cardiac
pacemaker implantation should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their NHS trusts.
• Ensure that patients and their carers understand the uncertainty about the
procedure's safety and efficacy compared with conventional pacemaker
implantation, and provide them with clear written information. In addition, the
use of NICE's information for the public on leadless cardiac pacemaker
implantation for bradyarrhythmias is recommended.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 3 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias (IPG626)
1.3 Further research in people who could have conventional cardiac
pacemaker implantation should report the patient selection criteria and
compare leadless pacemakers with conventional pacemakers. Follow-up
should be for at least 5 years and outcomes should include adverse
events, symptom relief, quality of life and device durability in the
long-term.
1.4 Clinicians should enter details about all patients having leadless cardiac
pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias onto the National Institute
for Cardiovascular Outcomes Research database and review local clinical
outcomes.
1.5 The procedure should only be done in specialist centres by clinicians
with specific training on, and supervised experience in, inserting the
device. Centres where this procedure is done should have both cardiac
and vascular surgical support for emergency treatment of complications.
1.6 NICE advises clinicians to follow the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency's (MHRA) Expert Advisory Group recommendations
on leadless cardiac pacemaker therapy.
1.7 NICE may review this procedure on publication of further evidence.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Bradyarrhythmias are abnormal heart rhythms that can result in a slow
heart rate (bradycardia), usually defined as less than 60 beats per
minute. There are a range of causes including diseases such as sick
sinus syndrome or atrioventricular block. The most common causes are
the natural ageing process, ischaemic heart disease, heart valve
disorders and heart failure. If untreated, bradycardia may lead to fatigue,
fainting, palpitations, dizziness, heart failure and an increased risk of
death.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 4 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias (IPG626)
Current treatments
2.2 Bradyarrhythmias are managed with pacemakers, as described in NICE
technology appraisal guidance on dual-chamber pacemakers for
symptomatic bradycardia due to sick sinus syndrome and/or
atrioventricular block and dual-chamber pacemakers for symptomatic
bradycardia due to sick sinus syndrome without atrioventricular block.
Dual-chamber pacing is recommended for symptomatic bradycardia
caused by sick sinus syndrome, atrioventricular block, or a combination
of sick sinus syndrome and/or atrioventricular block, and also for sick
sinus syndrome in people without atrioventricular block. Single-chamber
ventricular pacemakers may be used for atrioventricular block alone or
with sick sinus syndrome in people with continuous atrial fibrillation, or
people who have specific factors such as frailty or comorbidities that
influence the balance of risks and benefits in favour of single-chamber
pacing.
The procedure
2.3 The aim of implanting a leadless cardiac pacemaker is to detect cardiac
bradyarrhythmias and deliver electric pulses to the heart to increase the
heart rate. The leadless pacemaker has a built-in pulse generator,
battery and electrodes. The procedure is done under local anaesthesia,
with or without sedation, in a cardiac catheterisation laboratory. Under
fluoroscopic guidance, the proximal end of the pacemaker is attached to
a deflectable bespoke delivery catheter system and inserted
percutaneously through the femoral vein using a dedicated introducer
sheath. It is then advanced into the right atrium through the tricuspid
valve, into the right ventricle and positioned near the apex or lower
septum. Contrast may be injected into the right ventricle to visualise the
desired location. Once positioned, the pacemaker is deployed and
securely implanted into the endocardial wall using a fixation mechanism
(a screw-in helix or nitinol tines). An electrode at the distal end of the
pacemaker delivers electrical impulses that pace the heart. Electrical
measurements are taken and, if satisfactory, the pacemaker is released
from the catheter and the catheter is removed. If the position is
suboptimal, the pacemaker can be detached from the endocardium and
repositioned prior to final release of the delivery catheter.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 5 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias (IPG626)
2.4 The pacemaker is programmed using an external programmer that
transmits signals to it. The pacemaker can be retrieved using a catheter
retrieval system, if device dislodgement is discovered at follow-up.
2.5 The device can only detect and pace the right ventricle (single chamber)
in contrast to some conventional pacemakers that can provide dual-
chamber (right atrium and right ventricle) detection and pacing. It is
therefore suitable for people who only need single-chamber ventricular
pacing.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 8 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 6 case series and 2 retrospective matched case-control studies
and is presented in table 2 of the interventional procedures overview.
There is an overlap of patients in the included studies. Other relevant
literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: adequate pacing performance and quality of life.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: cardiac perforation, cardiac tamponade, pericardial
effusion, device dislodgement, battery failure, revision rates and duration
of device function.
3.4 Three submissions were received from patient organisations and were
discussed by the committee.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 6 ---
Leadless cardiac pacemaker implantation for bradyarrhythmias (IPG626)
Committee comments
3.5 The leadless cardiac pacemakers currently available are only used for
right ventricular pacing, and are not suitable for people who need
sequential pacing or dual-chamber pacing.
3.6 Problems related to battery life have been reported for 1 device.
3.7 Different devices are available or in development for use in this
procedure, and the technology and their attachment mechanisms are
evolving. There is limited evidence on efficacy and safety for some of
these devices.
3.8 The committee was informed that different manufacturers offer different
types of training programmes.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3060-9
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
