=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "metreleptin-for-treating-lipodystrophy-pdf-50216258848453.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:52.754566",
  "file_size_bytes": 207294,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/metreleptin-for-treating-lipodystrophy-pdf-50216258848453.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Metreleptin for treating
lipodystrophy
Highly specialised technologies guidance
Published: 24 February 2021
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/hst14

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
1 Recommendations
1.1 Metreleptin is recommended, within its marketing authorisation, as an option for
treating the complications of leptin deficiency in lipodystrophy for people who are
2 years and over and have generalised lipodystrophy.
1.2 Metreleptin is recommended as an option for treating the complications of leptin
deficiency in lipodystrophy for people who are 12 years and over, have partial
lipodystrophy, and do not have adequate metabolic control despite having
standard treatments. It is only recommended if they have an HbA1c level above
58 mmol/mol (7.5%), or fasting triglycerides above 5.0 mmol/litre, or both.
1.3 This recommendation is not intended to affect treatment with metreleptin that
was started in the NHS before this guidance was published. People having
treatment outside this recommendation may continue without change to the
funding arrangements in place for them before this guidance was published, until
they and their NHS clinician consider it appropriate to stop. This decision should
be made jointly by the clinician, the child or young person and their parents or
carers.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Lipodystrophy is a rare and serious condition that severely affects the quality of life of
people with the condition, and their families and carers. For children and young people
with the condition, it may also shorten their life expectancy. Supportive care includes
lifestyle modifications such as an extreme low-fat diet and exercise, cosmetic surgery, and
medication for diabetes and to lower lipids.
There is no trial directly comparing metreleptin with supportive care. Results from clinical
studies suggest that metreleptin appears to improve hyperphagia and reduces HbA1c and
triglyceride levels in people with lipodystrophy. An indirect comparison with supportive
care also suggests that metreleptin is more effective at improving HbA1c, triglyceride and
liver enzyme levels, as well as episodes of acute pancreatitis at 12-month follow up.
However, metreleptin's long-term effect and several assumptions in the economic
modelling are uncertain. Despite this, metreleptin is likely to provide important clinical
benefit and improve quality of life for people who have lipodystrophy, parents and carers.
It also provides value for money within the context of a highly specialised service. So, it is

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
recommended for use in the NHS.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
2 The condition
2.1 Lipodystrophy is a rare, heterogeneous group of syndromes characterised by
complete or partial loss, or absence of, subcutaneous adipose tissue. Without
sufficient adipose tissue there is disruption of the body's system for regulating
energy use and storage. This results in lipid accumulation in abnormal sites such
as the liver and muscle. Metabolic abnormalities often occur with lipodystrophy,
including: insulin resistance with resultant hyperinsulinemia and diabetes; hepatic
steatosis or steatohepatitis; and dyslipidaemia with severe hypertriglyceridaemia.
The associated lack of leptin, particularly in people with generalised
lipodystrophy, leads to symptoms such as hyperphagia. It may also contribute to
the metabolic abnormalities. Hyperphagia, muscle pain and female reproductive
dysfunction also have a significant effect on quality of life. Lipodystrophy is often
diagnosed late in the disease course or remains undiagnosed.
2.2 Lipodystrophy is generally classified based on the extent or pattern of fat loss
(generalised or partial), and whether the disease is congenital or acquired. There
are 4 major subtypes: congenital (inherited) and acquired generalised
lipodystrophy; and familial (inherited) and acquired partial lipodystrophy.
2.3 The prevalence of lipodystrophy depends on the subtype but is around 2.5
per 1 million of the population overall, with partial lipodystrophy being slightly
more common. It is estimated that there are around 200 people with
lipodystrophy in England; a proportion of these people will be eligible for
metreleptin treatment.
2.4 There are no licensed treatments in the UK for lipodystrophy. The condition is
currently managed with lifestyle modifications such as a low-fat diet and
exercise; cosmetic surgery; and medication to manage the metabolic
disturbances, including lipid-lowering drugs (for example, fibrates and statins)
and antidiabetic therapy (for example, metformin, insulin, sulphonylureas, and
thiazolidinediones).
2.5 A single National Specialist Service for people with lipodystrophy was established
in 2011 at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge. Treatment with metreleptin is
currently provided there as part of an early access programme, under the

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
National Severe Insulin Resistance Service at the hospital.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
3 The technology
3.1 Metreleptin (Myalepta, Amryt) is an analogue of the human hormone leptin, which
is secreted into the circulation from adipocytes. Metreleptin has a UK marketing
authorisation under 'exceptional circumstances' as 'an adjunct to diet as a
replacement therapy to treat the complications of leptin deficiency in
lipodystrophy (LD) patients:
• with confirmed congenital generalised LD (Berardinelli–Seip syndrome) or
acquired generalised LD (Lawrence syndrome) in adults and children 2 years
of age and above
• with confirmed familial partial LD or acquired partial LD (Barraquer–Simons
syndrome), in adults and children 12 years of age and above for whom
standard treatments have failed to achieve adequate metabolic control'.
3.2 Metreleptin is administered daily by subcutaneous injection. For people weighing
40 kg or less, the starting daily dose is 0.06 mg/kg. Dose adjustments of
0.02 mg/kg are allowed up to a maximum daily dose of 0.13 mg/kg. For men and
women weighing over 40 kg, the starting daily dose is 2.5 mg and 5 mg
respectively. For people weighing over 40 kg, dose adjustments of 1.25 mg to
2.5 mg are allowed up to a maximum daily dose of 10 mg.
3.3 The most common treatment-emergent adverse events in metreleptin studies
included weight loss, hypoglycaemia, fatigue, injection site reactions, neutralising
antibodies, decreased appetite, nausea, headache, abdominal pain, menorrhagia
and alopecia. For full details of adverse reactions and contraindications, see the
summary of product characteristics.
3.4 The price of metreleptin per 11.3 mg vial (up to a 10 mg dose) is £2,335.00; per
5.8 mg vial (up to a 5 mg dose) is £1,167.50 and per 3 mg vial (up to a 2.8 mg
dose) is £583.75 (excluding VAT; company's evidence submission). The company
has a commercial arrangement (simple discount patient access scheme). This
makes metreleptin available to the NHS with a discount. The size of the discount
is commercial in confidence. It is the company's responsibility to let relevant NHS
organisations know details of the discount.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
4 Consideration of the evidence
The evaluation committee (see section 6) considered evidence submitted by Amryt, the
views of people with the condition and those who represent them, clinical experts and
NHS England, a review of this submission by the evidence review group (ERG), the
technical report, and responses from stakeholders. See the committee papers for full
details of the evidence.
History of the evaluation
4.1 Previously, 2 committee meetings were held for the evaluation of this topic. After
the second committee meeting (12 February 2019), a final evaluation
determination was drafted of the committee's considerations and conclusions
based on the evidence presented. NICE received 2 appeals against that final
evaluation determination. The appeal hearing did not take place because
Aegerion (the marketing authorisation holder at the time) requested
reconsideration of this topic (in line with the highly specialised interim methods
and process guide). This was granted and the final evaluation determination was
withdrawn. For reconsideration of the topic, the company also agreed to address
the concerns outlined in the drafted final evaluation determination by presenting
additional evidence and doing further analysis. Amryt, the company that is now
the marketing authorisation holder, submitted the additional evidence and new
analyses for reconsideration. The resubmission went through a technical
engagement process in August 2020.
4.2 Concerns raised by the committee during the second meeting (reported in the
final evaluation document that was withdrawn) included:
• Lack of evidence on relative effectiveness of metreleptin on disease
progression or important outcomes such as hyperphagia:
－ The systematic literature review may have missed some studies.
－ There was no evidence on change in patient experience and disease
progression for people who did not have metreleptin.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
－ Early access programme results did not improve the committee's
understanding of metreleptin's relative effectiveness in the short or long
term because they did not include long-term data or patient-reported
outcomes (such as hyperphagia).
• The economic model focused on mortality and did not capture important
aspects of the condition; it oversimplified its underlying progression. The
committee's suggestion of using a model structure with established diabetes
or fatty liver disease models to capture some important aspects of disease
progression was not followed.
• Starting and stopping criteria were not included in the economic model.
• Rescaled utility estimated from the discrete choice experiment was more
plausible than the original discrete choice experiment, but there were still
uncertainties.
• Carer utility decrement was based on literature and only applied to the
supportive care arm.
4.3 The evaluation committee was aware that 1 issue (issue 5) was resolved during
the technical engagement stage. It agreed that yearly rates of stopping treatment
(8.93% in year 1, 5.63% in years 2 to 9 and 2.04% in year 10 onwards) were a
good reflection of treatment stopping seen in the first year of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) trial and the decline in how many people stopped
treatment over time. It agreed that it was better than applying a single stopping
rate only based on those who chose to stop metreleptin in each population (1.5%
for generalised lipodystrophy and 3.86% for partial lipodystrophy) from NIH trials.
4.4 There was 1 remaining area of uncertainty associated with the analyses
presented (see the technical report in the final evaluation determination

decision making. It discussed issue 1, issues 2 and 3 together; issue 4, issue 6,
issue 7, issue 8, issue 9, and issue 10, which were outstanding after technical
engagement. When forming the recommendations, the committee took into
account the full range of factors that might affect its decision, in particular, the
nature of the condition, the clinical effectiveness, value for money and the impact
beyond direct health benefits.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Nature of the condition
Burden of disease
4.5 The patient experts explained the all-consuming nature of lipodystrophy. They
highlighted that, other than the serious metabolic abnormalities caused by the
condition, hyperphagia was a predominant debilitating feature. The company
stated that this feeling of constant hunger was better described as starvation to
convey the extent of its debilitating effects. The patient experts explained that
eating does not relieve the hunger, so people with the condition are constantly
looking for food, which results in physical, psychological and behavioural
complications. For children, constant supervision is needed to ensure they do not
eat inedible objects. The constant food seeking, and associated lack of
concentration and fatigue, negatively affects social and professional life, and is a
significant financial burden. The patient experts highlighted that, in the absence
of specific treatment targeting lipodystrophy and hyperphagia, dietary advice is a
mainstay of supportive treatment. They noted their frustration with this because
dietary control is often impossible when overcome by a feeling of starvation. The
patient experts also noted that caring for a child with lipodystrophy is a
substantial burden, affecting parents and carers both emotionally and financially.
The committee acknowledged that lipodystrophy is a debilitating condition, and
that hyperphagia has a significant effect on quality of life, which affects patients,
parents and carers. For children and young people with congenital generalised
lipodystrophy, the condition may also shorten their life expectancy. The
committee recognised that there is a significant unmet need for an effective
treatment option.
Diagnosis
4.6 The clinical experts explained that lipodystrophy diagnosis may be delayed
because it is not immediately recognised and is a rare condition. Diagnosing
generalised lipodystrophy, particularly when congenital, is easier because people
typically present at between 1 to 2 years old, and develop diabetes and damage
in 1 or more organs by the time they are 2 or 3 years old. However, partial
lipodystrophy usually presents later, and symptoms are heterogeneous, which

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
makes diagnosis at an early stage of the disease difficult. The clinical experts
highlighted that an earlier diagnosis is important to prevent disease progression.
The patient experts supported the view of the clinical experts, stating that partial
lipodystrophy can progress and become severe if undiagnosed and untreated.
The company explained that some people may have a mutation that is unrelated
to leptin deficiency but manifests with similar symptoms, emphasising that the
right clinical diagnosis is critical for effective treatment. The clinical experts
confirmed that patients are routinely genotyped as part of the NHS service at
Addenbrooke's Hospital. The committee was satisfied that people with
lipodystrophy can be accurately identified, but noted that diagnosis in some
people with milder forms of partial lipodystrophy may be delayed.
Impact of the new technology
Clinical trial evidence
4.7 The committee discussed the clinical evidence submitted by the company:
• NIH 991265 was a pilot, dose-escalation study to determine the safety and
efficacy of short-term leptin replacement (up to 8 months). After NIH 991265
ended, patients continued treatment in the extension study NIH 20010769 for
long-term follow up. All but 1 patient who completed NIH 991265 moved to
NIH 20010769. This meant the studies were treated as 1 study continuously
enrolling patients with generalised (n=66) and partial lipodystrophy (n=41)
over the course of 14 years.
• FHA101 was an open-label, single-arm, expanded-access study with
9 patients with generalised lipodystrophy and 32 patients with partial
lipodystrophy enrolled over the course of 6 years.
Only 1 patient in these studies was recruited from the UK, but the clinical
experts confirmed that the trial populations were generalisable to patients
seen in clinical practice in England. The ERG highlighted that estimates of
treatment effects were based on changes from baseline in single-arm
metreleptin treatment studies during the first and second committee
meetings. The committee noted that there was a lack of evidence on

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
metreleptin's relative treatment effect. In its resubmission, and in response to
committee's concerns at the second meeting (see section 4.2), the company
updated its systematic literature review. It used a new search strategy to
include search terms for comparators and did a new indirect treatment
comparison using 3 methods. The ERG noted that the new systematic
literature review addressed its previous critiques on searching. The
committee concluded that it was satisfied with the company's attempt to
identify evidence on comparators in its updated systematic literature review.
Early access programme
4.8 One of the committee's concerns was the lack of evidence on metreleptin's long-
term effect in people who have treatment (see section 4.2). In its resubmission,
the company provided additional clinical evidence with 36-month follow up from
the metreleptin early access programme (n=31, including all patients who had
treatment since the start of the programme) at Addenbrooke's Hospital. Data
were collected retrospectively, with clinicians entering patient data on baseline
characteristics, organ damage and complications, laboratory values and
metreleptin dose. The ERG noted that the additional data showed persistence of
changes with metreleptin treatment up to 36 months, with a reduction in HbA1c
and triglycerides (see section 4.11). But, there were no patient-reported
outcomes or measures of patient experience (including hyperphagia) presented,
despite some people having treatment for 10 years or more. The company
explained that when the early access programme was set up in 2005 there was
no pre-specified data collection protocol, so the only data available were from a
review of patient medical records. In addition, clinical experts noted that the
treatment eligibility criteria currently used were not in place when the programme
was set up. Because the criteria were only introduced 2 years ago, not all people
with partial lipodystrophy in the programme had poor enough metabolic status at
baseline to be eligible for the treatment under the current criteria. For example,
people with high levels of triglycerides and a low level of HbA1c were enrolled at
the time. The clinical experts also stated that the programme had a small sample
size, and there were very few data on generalised lipodystrophy's response to
metreleptin. This meant that no conclusion on efficacy could be made from the
early access programme. The committee welcomed the company's attempt to
gather additional clinical evidence to supplement the sparse evidence base. It

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
agreed that the new evidence indicated that metreleptin treatment improves
metabolic outcomes at 36-month follow up. But, the committee did not
substantially improve its understanding of the relative effectiveness of
metreleptin. It concluded that evidence from the early access programme itself
was not sufficient to address the gaps in the clinical evidence base.
Representativeness of the NIH follow-up study and the indirect
treatment comparison
4.9 In response to the committee's concerns about the lack of evidence on
metreleptin's relative effectiveness (see section 4.2), the company did an indirect
treatment comparison. This used 3 methods (inverse probability weighting,
multivariate regression analysis, and naive comparison) to estimate the treatment
effect of metreleptin relative to supportive care for key clinical outcomes. Data
used to inform the indirect treatment comparison were from the NIH 991265/
NIH 20010769 study (metreleptin arm) and the GL/PL natural history study
(supportive care arm), respectively. Outcomes assessed included change from
baseline in HbA1c, triglycerides and liver enzyme (alanine aminotransferase [ALT]
and aspartate aminotransferase [AST]) levels, the incidence of acute pancreatitis
and all-cause mortality. The results of the indirect treatment comparison showed
statistically significant differences in favour of metreleptin on HbA1c,
triglycerides, liver enzymes and reducing the risk of pancreatitis at 12-month
follow up. It also suggested that survival was worse with metreleptin compared
with supportive care, but the difference was not statistically significant.
4.10 The committee agreed in a previous meeting that the NIH follow-up study was
representative of people with lipodystrophy in the UK and appropriate to be used
for treatment comparison. However, with additional evidence available from the
early access programme, the ERG raised 2 concerns related to the indirect
treatment comparison. These were the representativeness of the NIH follow-up
study used to inform the indirect treatment comparison compared with the early
access programme, and the selection of covariates used to adjust for differences
between patient cohorts in the indirect treatment comparison. The ERG noted
differences in the effects of metreleptin treatment (particularly for changes in
triglyceride levels) between the early access programme (see section 4.8) and
the NIH follow-up study (see section 4.7). For example, for people with

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
generalised lipodystrophy, the 12-month change in triglycerides was -3.5 mmol/
litre (based only on people for whom both baseline and 12-month data were
available) in the early access programme, compared with -10.54 mmol/litre in the
NIH follow up. The ERG noted that the early access programme estimate is closer
to that of the GL/PL natural history study estimate of -4.43 mmol/litre. The
change in HbA1c at 12 months was also lower in the early access programme
(-1.5% for those with generalised lipodystrophy) than in the NIH follow-up study
(-1.94% for all patients). Given these differences and the fact that people enrolled
in the early access programme are from the UK, the ERG stated that the early
access programme should be used in the indirect treatment comparison instead
of the NIH follow-up study. The company explained that the early access
programme had a much smaller sample size (n=31) and started over a decade
ago. The eligibility criteria have evolved along with the growing evidence base for
people with lipodystrophy. The clinical experts highlighted the limitations of the
early access programme data, namely that people did not have poor enough
metabolic status at baseline when they were enrolled in the programme (see
section 4.8). They added that the early access programme was not a research
study, it was based on 'compassionate use' rather than formal clinical criteria.
One of the clinical experts involved in the early access programme explained that
recent outcomes are becoming more and more aligned with those of the NIH
study follow up. This is because of the application of recent clinical inclusion
criteria (see section 4.8). The clinical experts stated that the indirect treatment
comparison would be better informed by the NIH follow-up study. The ERG was
also concerned about the limited covariates adjusted for in the indirect treatment
comparison. This is because important prognostic covariates such as baseline
HbA1c and triglyceride levels were not controlled for in the analysis. The company
argued that these were not confounding factors because they were not related to
treatment allocation. The company also explored using additional covariates in a
sensitivity analysis. But, it stated that this analysis was not feasible because of
small sample size, the high proportion of missing data and the large number of
potential covariates. The company explained that there was more than 90% of
missing data and, despite a small sample number (n=31), the 3 methods it used
to adjust for cofounders (inverse probability weighting, multivariate regression
analysis, and naive comparison) showed consistent results with statistical
significance. The company added that its approach was driven by clinical opinion
and statistical principles. The committee recognised the limitation of the
company's indirect treatment comparison. However, it understood the challenges

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
in generating evidence for ultra-rare diseases given the availability of the data.
The committee concluded that, despite the limitations, it was broadly satisfied
with the company's methods for the indirect treatment comparison.
HbA1c, triglycerides and liver enzyme levels as surrogate end
points
4.11 The primary outcomes measured in the clinical studies included absolute change
in HbA1c levels and percent change in fasting serum triglyceride levels from
baseline to month 12. Metreleptin was associated with a statistically significant
improvement in both primary outcomes compared with baseline in NIH 991265/
20010769. In the generalised lipodystrophy population this was -2.2, percentage
point (pp), p<0.001 for HbA1c levels and -32.1%, p=0.001 for triglyceride levels. In
the partial lipodystrophy population this was -0.6 pp, p=0.005 for HbA1c and
-20.8%, p=0.013 for triglyceride levels. Decreases in HbA1c and triglyceride levels
were not statistically significant in the FHA101 study. Additional data from the
early access programme (at 36-month follow up) that became available for the
resubmission also suggested that metreleptin reduced HbA1c in both people with
generalised and partial lipodystrophy (-1.1% and -1.2% respectively) and fasting
triglyceride levels (-57.6% and -23.9%, respectively). No statistical significance
was reported. The company also presented evidence on metreleptin's treatment
effect on the liver enzymes, ALT and AST. This showed treatment effect in favour
of metreleptin at 12-month follow up (see section 4.9).
4.12 The committee discussed HbA1c, triglyceride and liver enzyme levels as
surrogates because changes in these outcomes were used to adjust long-term
transitions between states in the modelling. As part of their resubmission, the
company held a Delphi panel involving 10 international clinical experts (3 of whom
were clinical experts from Addenbrooke's Hospital). The Delphi panel reached a
consensus that HbA1c is a good predictor of diabetes-related complications
including cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, retinopathy and neuropathy in
people with lipodystrophy. The company explained that the relationship between
HbA1c and long-term clinical outcomes based on 30-year follow up in diabetes
studies is established and widely accepted. The clinical experts explained that
triglyceride levels were strongly linked to pancreatitis but that the association
was harder to capture mathematically. The clinical experts agreed that HbA1c and

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
triglyceride levels are used in clinical practice and are considered to be
reasonably predictive of clinical outcomes. However, the relationship may not be
identical to that in other disease areas such as diabetes. For example, the risk of
early death is greater for people with lipodystrophy compared with people with
type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome. They stated that, in general, people
with lipodystrophy with lower HbA1c and triglyceride levels have a better
prognosis than people with higher levels. They also noted that the effects of
HbA1c and triglycerides were broadly correlated but there may be differences
between individuals with lipodystrophy depending on other independent factors,
for example, genetic factors. They added that HbA1c can predict for
complications of the eye and nervous system, as in type 2 diabetes, but
differently for other organ complications such as complications of the kidney,
liver and heart. They also stated that many people can stop insulin completely
after starting leptin treatment. The committee also considered the merit of liver
enzymes as a surrogate outcome for liver complications. Clinical experts
explained that these are poor predictors of liver disease. The company stated
that, because it knew liver enzymes were not a good surrogate, it sought the
opinion of clinical experts (through the Delphi panel) on the likely effect of
metreleptin on liver disease. The committee asked about the likelihood of HbA1c
and triglyceride levels falling without metreleptin. The clinical experts stated that
if people had not previously been given any dietary advice, that giving it at the
start of treatment could result in improved levels. But, the extent of improvement
may be limited because of hyperphagia. In fact, they stated that without
treatment, HbA1c levels are likely to reverse to their baseline values over 6 to
12 months, or sooner. The committee noted that evidence showed that
metreleptin is effective in lowering HbA1c and triglyceride levels. Evidence also
showed that metreleptin may affect liver enzymes but their correlation with the
progression of liver disease is less clear. The committee concluded that using
HbA1c to predict diabetes-related complications in people with lipodystrophy is
acceptable but the relationship between liver enzymes and liver disease is
uncertain.
Clinical and patient-perceived outcomes
4.13 The clinical studies did not include an objective measure to capture the effect of
metreleptin on hyperphagia even though, as the patient experts explained, it is a

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
defining characteristic of lipodystrophy with important physical and emotional
consequences. The clinical experts agreed that treatment targeting hyperphagia
is critical because eating less means some complications of lipodystrophy will
improve. The clinical experts also explained that hyperphagia is caused by a
deficiency in the hormone leptin (see section 2.1). They also noted that it was
hard to predict the impact of metreleptin effect on hyperphagia and quality of life,
because there is no simple relationship between eating less and quality of life.
The committee acknowledged the expert comments and agreed that any
improvements in hyperphagia would be important, but difficult to capture when
considering the clinical benefits of metreleptin. The ERG noted that the NIH study
measured food intake (kcal) per day in a subset of patients. This showed that,
while intake decreased from baseline initially (4-month assessment), decreases
were not statistically significant at the end of the year. Results from the NIH
follow-up study showed that 99% of people who had metreleptin reported
improvements in hyperphagia. The ERG highlighted that improvements were
assessed in a review of medical notes and, although results suggested
metreleptin improved hyperphagia, these judgements were not made using an
objective measure. The patient experts stated that, since starting metreleptin,
they had experienced a feeling of fullness after eating and that this had
dramatically altered their lives. One patient expert also noted that, before their
daughter started metreleptin, they had to lock cupboards because her intense
hunger led her to search for food. But, since starting the treatment her hunger
had reduced, and food seeking had stopped. The clinical experts agreed that
metreleptin reduces hunger and food seeking. They also noted that children with
congenital leptin deficiency could continue benefiting from metreleptin when
having treatment for over 20 years, including avoiding obesity and related
comorbidities. The committee queried whether there was any continued effect of
metreleptin if patients stop the treatment. Clinical experts stated that symptoms
of hyperphagia will return after a few days once metreleptin is stopped. The
committee noted that, in the studies, a substantial number of patients stopped
metreleptin treatment. The clinical experts explained that this could be because
metreleptin only treats leptin deficiency and does not correct problems
associated with loss of adipose tissue. The company explained that some
patients who were seen as stopping treatment had remained on metreleptin but
moved to local treatment centres where treatment was provided through
compassionate use programmes. It stated that it intended to capture patient-
reported outcomes, including hunger scores, as part of its post-authorisation

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
commitments. The committee agreed that any additional information (qualitative
or quantitative) about the experience of hyperphagia in people with
lipodystrophy, and the effect metreleptin has on it, could substantially improve its
understanding of the potential clinical benefits. It concluded that capturing the
effect of metreleptin on hyperphagia could be challenging but was important to
assess the nature and magnitude of any clinical benefits of metreleptin while
patients are on treatment, and also after stopping treatment.
Starting and stopping criteria
4.14 The committee queried whether all people diagnosed with lipodystrophy and
covered by the marketing authorisation would be expected to have treatment
with metreleptin. The clinical experts stated that most people with generalised
lipodystrophy have hyperphagia and organ dysfunction, so would be expected to
benefit from leptin treatment. The committee was also aware that everyone
diagnosed with generalised lipodystrophy had leptin treatment as part of the
early access programme at Addenbrooke's Hospital.
The marketing authorisation for partial lipodystrophy (for people aged 12 and
over) was not restrictive. But, the committee was aware that several different
subsets of people with partial lipodystrophy had been presented in the company
evidence:
• NIH studies 991265/20010769 included leptin level criteria in their definition
of people with partial lipodystrophy (used for the indirect treatment
comparison):
－ NIH 2001769: below 12.0 nanogram/ml in women, below 8.0 nanogram/ml
in men, and below 6 nanogram/ml in children between 6 months and
5 years
－ NIH 991265: 8.0 nanogram/ml and below in women and 6.0 nanogram/ml
and below in men
－ HbA1c 6.5% or more or triglycerides 5.65 mmol/litre or more, or both.
• A subgroup of people with partial lipodystrophy from the NIH studies with
baseline HbA1c 6.5% or more, or triglycerides 5.65 mmol/litre or more, or both

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
(used for model inputs for the economic analysis, including baseline levels of
metabolic surrogates and changes from baseline of HbA1c). The company
considered that this subgroup of people with partial lipodystrophy represents
a more severe group compared with the overall population of people with
partial lipodystrophy in the NIH studies. This is because they are more at risk
of organ damage and this best reflects the licensed indication.
• The early access programme included people with partial lipodystrophy with
baseline leptin below 12 nanogram/ml and HbA1c 6.5% or more, or
triglycerides 5.65 mmol/litre or more, or both (used by the company for
baseline patient distribution in the model). The early access programme also
included people with partial lipodystrophy who did not meet these criteria
(see section 4.8).
• After the technical engagement, the company suggested further restricting
the group of people with partial lipodystrophy from their original definition
(HbA1c 6.5% or more, or triglycerides 5.65 mmol/litre or more, or both), to
baseline HbA1c above 58 mmol/mol (7.5%), or fasting triglycerides above
5.00 mmol/litre, or both. But, they accepted the HbA1c could be lower under
exceptional circumstances such as in cases of extreme hyperphagia, or
because of severe side effects from other glucose-lowering medications or
other serious complications of inadequate metabolic control such as
progressive liver disease. The company explained these restrictive criteria
were developed based on the clinical evidence from the NIH studies 991265/
20010769, UK clinical expert experience and consensus from European
lipodystrophy centres.
The ERG pointed out that there was no clinical or economic evidence for this
further restricted subgroup of partial lipodystrophy proposed by the
company. It was concerned that the effect on the population size eligible for
treatment was unknown given the lack of information on the number of
people who would actually fulfil these criteria, including the exceptions. It
noted that the narrower population would cause issues around application of
the various data sources to UK clinical practice. The clinical experts
explained that response to metreleptin is greater in people with lipodystrophy
and with more severe metabolic status (that is, HbA1c and triglyceride levels)
at baseline. They further explained that the criteria of 'HbA1c above 7.5%' was
based on the recommended value for a person with diabetes to target in

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
clinical practice. The criteria of 'fasting triglycerides above 5.00 mmol/litre'
was based on the value above which people with diabetes are at risk of
pancreatitis. The committee understood the rationale for choosing the further
restricted criteria for the subgroup of people with partial lipodystrophy. It
acknowledged the ERG's concerns, but agreed that partial lipodystrophy with
more severe metabolic status (that is, HbA1c above 58 mmol/mol (7.5%), or
fasting triglycerides above 5.00 mmol/litre, or both) may benefit more from
metreleptin. Because the subgroup of people with partial lipodystrophy
included in the economic model had less severe metabolic status (HbA1c
6.5% or more, or triglycerides 5.65 mmol/litre or more, or both), the estimated
cost effectiveness for metreleptin was likely to be too high. The committee
concluded it would take this into account in its decision making.
Adverse events
4.15 The committee noted that the proportion of patients in the main clinical trials who
had a treatment-emergent adverse event (TEAE) was high:
• In the NIH studies, around 89% of patients with generalised lipodystrophy
and 85% with partial lipodystrophy had an event. This was severe in 44% and
39% of patients, respectively, and caused 8% and 2%, respectively, to stop
treatment.
• In the FHA101 study, around 78% of patients with generalised lipodystrophy
and 84% with partial lipodystrophy had a TEAE. This was severe in 67% and
28% of patients, respectively, and caused 11% and 9%, respectively, to stop
treatment.
The company commented that stopping happened not only because of
adverse events, but also because the studies included some patients for
whom metreleptin was not effective because their condition was not related
to leptin. Also, some patients stopped treatment because they were
pregnant. The company added that TEAEs happened over a long period of
time, more than 3 years in the NIH studies and over 2 years in the FHA101
study, and that several reported TEAEs (such as decreased appetite and
weight, and hypoglycaemia) were consistent with metreleptin's mechanism of

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
action. The clinical experts suggested that adherence is likely to improve in
practice as the benefits of metreleptin become clear. The company and
clinical experts also noted that episodes of pancreatitis improved with
metreleptin compared with baseline. A patient expert highlighted that she
had gone from having frequent events of pancreatitis to no events since
starting metreleptin treatment. The ERG noted that, in its original submission,
the company only included data for pancreatitis as an adverse event
happening after metreleptin withdrawal: 4 patients with generalised
lipodystrophy and 2 patients with partial lipodystrophy had treatment-
emergent pancreatitis across studies (1 patient died, 5 recovered). However,
the ERG also noted that the NIH data indicated that patients had
improvements in pancreatitis on metreleptin. The company noted that TEAEs
were not reported in the data collected from the early access programme.
The ERG highlighted that this contradicted the company's comments from
the first evaluation committee meeting that additional adverse event
information could be provided. The committee agreed that additional real-
world data on adverse events would be informative. But, based on what it
had heard from the experts, it concluded that the tolerability profile of
metreleptin was likely to be acceptable.
4.16 In the NIH 991265/20010769 and FHA101 studies, 88% of people developed
antibodies to metreleptin, and 4% developed neutralising antibodies to
metreleptin. This raised concern that developing neutralising antibodies could
affect metabolic control and immune function. The company explained that
neutralising antibodies were only reported in 4% of people. Therefore, it did not
anticipate this affecting a significant proportion of people or affecting outcomes
such as HbA1c and triglyceride levels in the long term. Clinical experts stated that
neutralising antibodies are rare, and although relevant to some people, do not
seem to be a frequent problem in clinical practice. The same issues are seen in
other metabolic diseases, but it does not affect the efficacy of the drug. They
noted that neutralising antibodies should still be monitored. The committee
concluded that neutralising antibodies did not seem to be a significant issue, but
this should still be monitored in the future.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Cost to the NHS and value for money
Company's economic model
4.17 The company developed a de novo individual patient-level model addressing
previous committee concerns (see section 4.2). The model consists of 6 Markov
sub-models. These simulate the progression of disease on distinct organ systems
affected by lipodystrophy, capturing the key lipodystrophy-related complications
that affect health-related quality of life, costs and mortality over the lifetime of
people with lipodystrophy. The 6 organ sub-models are: pancreas, liver disease,
cardiovascular disease, kidney, neuropathy (nerves) and retinopathy (eyes). In
each cycle (which lasted for 1 year), a person is simultaneously in a single
discrete health state in each of the 6 independent organ sub-models. A person
can die during each cycle, in which case they are removed from all sub-models
into the death state.
• Pancreas sub-model starts in the 'no pancreatitis' state when a person is at
risk of developing pancreatitis.
• Liver sub-model is based on NICE's guideline on non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD). People transition through health states, from having no or
asymptomatic fibrosis, to advanced fibrosis, to compensated and then
decompensated cirrhosis.
• Cardiovascular sub-model: people start in the 'no cardiovascular disease'
state, when they are at risk of experiencing cardiovascular complications
(stroke, angina, congestive heart failure, and myocardial infarction).
• Kidney sub-model is based on the structure of the Sheffield diabetes model.
People start in the 'no chronic kidney disease' state, when they can transition
through microalbuminuria and macroalbuminuria to the end-stage renal
disease (ESRD) health state. From ESRD, people can transition to receiving a
kidney transplant (tunnel state), moving to the post-transplant state in the
following cycle.
• Neuropathy sub-model: people start in the 'no peripheral neuropathy' state
and can progress to peripheral neuropathy, peripheral arterial disease with
amputation, and can move to the post-amputation state in the following

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
cycle.
• Retinopathy sub-model: people start in the 'no retinopathy' state and can
progress to blindness either directly, or by progressing through various retinal
diseases such as background retinopathy, proliferative retinopathy and
macular oedema.
• People are at risk of death in all states.
The ERG noted that the company's sub-model structure is an improvement
from previous submissions (see section 4.2). This is because it is better
structured to account for the potential progression of complications related
to lipodystrophy over time. However, it relies on the assumption that people
with diabetes or elevated triglyceride levels, because of lipodystrophy, will
follow a similar course to people with similar metabolic abnormalities but
different aetiologies. It stated that this was an area of considerable
uncertainty. The company explained that its choice to follow a diabetes
framework for its model structure was in response to the committee's
previous suggestion (see section 4.2). The model is based on the structure of
the diabetes-related complications seen in the Sheffield diabetes model, and
the established model structure from NICE's guideline on NAFLD to reflect
liver disease progression. It chose the Sheffield diabetes model, among
others, because it considered it the most robust, and it was previously used
in a multiple technology assessment for diabetes. The committee was
satisfied with the company's attempt to capture the disease progression
using sub-models for each relevant organ. It was aware that there are
uncertainties as to what extent people with lipodystrophy will follow a similar
course to people with diabetes and fatty liver disease. However, given the
scarcity of evidence in lipodystrophy, the committee concluded that the
model structure is appropriate for decision making.
Transition probabilities adjusted by HbA1c for sub-models
4.18 The company used published literature for baseline transition probabilities for 4
of the sub-models that are diabetes-related complications: cardiovascular,
kidney, neuropathy and retinopathy. Baseline transition probabilities were then

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
adjusted according to the absolute change in HbA1c level from baseline to
12 months from NIH 991265/20010769, to generate probabilities for people
having metreleptin. For the liver sub-model, the baseline transition probability for
liver disease was derived from the model in NICE's guideline on NAFLD, and then
adjusted using reduction in risk estimated from the Delphi panel (company's base
case) or changes in liver enzymes from the indirect treatment comparison
(company's scenario analysis). For the pancreas sub-model, the baseline
transition probability for pancreatitis was directly sourced from the GL/PL natural
history study. It was then adjusted using odds ratios estimated from the indirect
treatment comparison (see section 4.9).
4.19 For the 4 diabetes-related sub-models, the ERG noted that the company did not
adjust the transition probabilities based on triglycerides, because of a lack of
data in the literature. The company explained that it meant that the transition
probabilities were underestimated in cases when hypertriglyceridaemia
contributes to the risk of a complication, such as cardiovascular disease. The
committee noted that using only HbA1c to adjust the transition probabilities in the
4 diabetes-related sub-models could either under or overestimate metreleptin's
treatment effect on those organ complications. But, the exact magnitude of that
is unlikely to be quantified because of limited evidence. It agreed that,
qualitatively, HbA1c has value as a surrogate for clinical outcomes in the
cardiovascular, kidney, neuropathy and retinopathy sub-models. It was generally
satisfied with the approach taken by the company to model transition
probabilities. The ERG preferred using the change in liver enzymes (trial-based
data) estimated from the indirect treatment comparison (rather than the risk
reduction estimate directly obtained from the Delphi panel) to adjust the baseline
transition probability for the liver in their base case. The committee recalled that
liver enzymes are a poor predictor for liver complications (see section 4.12). It
agreed that the Delphi panel, based on clinical experts' judgement, would be an
appropriate source to inform the liver transition probabilities in this case. It was
also aware that the choice between liver enzymes and the Delphi panel estimates
only had a minor impact on the cost-effectiveness estimate. The committee
concluded that it was generally satisfied with the company's approach to
modelling transition probabilities.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Utility decrements for organ complications
4.20 The committee was aware that the clinical trials of metreleptin did not collect any
quality-of-life data. In its resubmission, the company did a systematic literature
review to identify sources of utility values from the literature. The utility
decrement for pancreatitis was based on the discrete choice experiment (DCE)
from the original submission. The DCE was done for a large sample of the general
population, to estimate utility decrements associated with key lipodystrophy
attributes. The utility decrements for the other organs were taken from published
sources and those previously used and accepted in NICE's technology appraisal
guidance on type 2 diabetes and fatty liver disease. The committee agreed with
using utility decrements from other conditions than lipodystrophy, given the
scarcity of data for this condition. Also, to capture specific symptoms not already
accounted for in the sub-models (that is, hyperphagia, polycystic ovary
syndrome, inability to work and impaired physical appearance), the company's
model applied a utility differential (compared with supportive care) of 0.12, based
on the rescaled DCE from the original company submission (see section 4.2). The
committee recalled it had had concerns relating to the validity of the utility values
estimated from the DCE (see section 4.2). The company acknowledged the
limitations but stated that no alternative value could be sourced from the
literature. The patient expert explained that people with lipodystrophy with organ
damage may also have fertility issues, pain and fatigue, so those should be taken
into account in the model. The clinical expert added that, even when including
the utility differential of 0.12, there could be other symptoms or factors not
accounted for. The committee concluded it was generally satisfied with the
approach to include a utility differential to account for symptoms not captured by
estimates of utility related to organ damage.
Carer utility
4.21 The company recalled that the committee had concerns about how it had
modelled carer utility in its previous submission (see section 4.2). In its
resubmission, the model also included a utility decrement to account for the
burden on carers of -0.0986. This decrement was estimated as the difference
between the mean value for carers in the Lipodystrophy Caregiver Burden Survey
(done by the company to explore carers experience in the UK) and the general

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
population norm, obtained from the EQ-5D. The committee was satisfied with the
company's approach to model carer utility.
Number of carers
4.22 The company assumed that each patient had 2 carers. This was the median and
the rounded value of the mean of 1.67 carers, based on the Lipodystrophy
Caregiver Burden Survey. The company argued that the median is more likely to
be representative of the number of carers in UK clinical practice and was
validated by UK patient experts. The ERG used the mean of 1.67 in their base-
case model as is usual in health economic modelling. The committee agreed with
using 1.67 carers from the ERG because not all people with lipodystrophy will
have 2 carers. It concluded that it was satisfied with the ERG's approach.
Long-term effect of metreleptin on HbA1c, liver, quality of life,
and patient-reported outcomes such as hyperphagia after
stopping treatment
Metreleptin's treatment effect on HbA1c after stopping treatment
4.23 Although there is no evidence on metreleptin's effect on HbA1c after stopping
treatment, the company's model assumed that metreleptin's treatment effect on
HbA1c will be maintained for a lifetime after stopping treatment. In the model,
when people start metreleptin, their HbA1c level is fully reduced (in the first
cycle), based on the change from baseline to 12 months from the NIH 991265/
20010769 studies. In subsequent cycles, people have a yearly rise of 0.15% in
their HbA1c level, regardless of whether they have or have not stopped
metreleptin, or have supportive care. The yearly increase of 0.15% in HbA1c level
was assumed from NICE's technology appraisal guidance on canagliflozin in
combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes. It is intended to reflect disease
progression in people with diabetes. This yearly rise continues up to a ceiling of
12%, which represents people whose diabetes is poorly controlled (based on
clinical opinion from the Delphi panel). The ERG considered this persistence of
effect after stopping treatment unrealistic. During technical engagement, the

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
company explained that complications associated with diabetes develop over
many years at a rate and extent that is related to the adequacy of glucose
control. Therefore, a slow-offset period of treatment effect would be expected
after stopping treatment. This is because the benefit of controlling blood glucose
with metreleptin would decline at a similar rate to benefit accruing. The ERG
argued that there is no evidence for this. It noted that the company assumed the
lag between glucose control (marked by HbA1c) and the effect on risk of
complications in the model after stopping treatment. But, this lag was not
modelled at the start of the treatment when people are at increased risk because
of previous poor glucose control. It therefore removed this assumption (lifetime
HbA1c benefit) in their base case so that HbA1c returned to baseline within the
year after stopping metreleptin. The ERG also excluded the annual drift of 0.15%
after stopping treatment, as was modelled in NICE's technology appraisal
guidance on canagliflozin in combination therapy for treating type 2 diabetes.
The clinical experts stated that HbA1c level is likely to revert to baseline levels
over 6 to 12 months after stopping treatment (see section 4.12) and agreed that
the ERG's base case best reflected this statement. The committee concluded
that the likely delayed onset of treatment effect compared with the slow offset of
treatment effect does not have a substantial impact on modelling. This is because
the lag is only about 1 year and any delay would happen at the beginning and end
of treatment. This means they, in part, would cancel each other out. The
committee was satisfied with the company's approach of modelling HbA1c level
while on treatment. But, it agreed that the duration after which HbA1c reverts to
baseline levels (6 to 12 months) after stopping treatment should be reflected in
the model.
Metreleptin's treatment effect on liver disease after stopping treatment
4.24 Similarly, although there is no evidence of an effect of metreleptin on liver
complications after stopping treatment, the company assumed (in their base
case) that the liver benefit would remain for a lifetime after stopping treatment.
This was based on clinical experts' opinion stating that residual liver benefit will
be retained and that it would take several years to return to a baseline level of
risk. Additionally, the company applied the persisting lifetime liver benefit in
addition to the period of treatment effect after stopping treatment. Therefore, the
experts' statements were not reflected in the model appropriately. The clinical

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
experts explained that some sustained slowing of liver damage may be
maintained for months when metreleptin is stopped. The ERG remained uncertain
of the true period and level of benefit when metreleptin is stopped. However, in
their base case, the ERG included the 1-year efficacy after stopping treatment to
reflect the possibility that there may be some residual benefit to the liver. The
committee concluded that the ERG's analysis was appropriate and consistent
with the clinical experts' views.
Metreleptin's treatment effect on quality of life and patient-reported outcomes
such as hyperphagia after stopping treatment
4.25 The committee discussed how the utility differential and carer utility (see
section 4.20 and section 4.21) are modelled when metreleptin is stopped. The
company assumed, in its base-case model, that 50% of the 0.12 differential and
50% of benefit to carers would be maintained over the patients' lifetime after
stopping treatment. The ERG's base case removed the assumption of the 50%
continued lifetime treatment benefits. This is because including it would suggest
continued absence of hyperphagia and continued ability to work, but there is no
evidence to support this. During the technical engagement, the company
explained that the utility differential accounted not only for hyperphagia but also
other symptoms not captured in the organ damage sub-models. The ERG noted
that hyperphagia and inability to work accounted for about 80% of the utility
differential according to the company's rescaled DCE. However, it recalled that
the symptoms of hunger would return within days after stopping metreleptin (see
section 4.13) and ability to work is not in NICE's reference case for consideration.
The committee asked how much weight hyperphagia accounted for in the utility
differential. The company explained it was not a primary driver but still had a
weight of about 25%. The committee considered it appropriate to account for
specific symptoms not related to organ damage separately, some of which may
not return fully after stopping treatment, as a utility differential. But, it concluded
that the ERG's approach of removing the assumed lifetime maintenance of 50%
utility differential to both patients and carers is preferred.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Stopping rule
4.26 The company's model structure for metreleptin included a stopping rule for
people with partial lipodystrophy. At 9 months after the start of metreleptin
treatment, a specialist service review will see whether treatment should be
stopped if the following metabolic criteria have not been met: an HbA1c reduction
of at least 0.75% from baseline, or a fasting triglyceride reduction of at least 50%
from baseline. A clinical expert stated that there was a consensus in European
lipodystrophy centres to stop metreleptin at 6 to 9 months if the person did not
take the treatment properly or did not engage with appointments, or there was no
HbA1c reduction of at least 0.5% from baseline or a fall in fasting triglycerides of
at least 50% from baseline. The clinical expert can apply their own judgement and
agree to continue to treat the lipodystrophy even if the criteria are not met. The
committee noted that the company's stopping rule did not match the one from
the clinical experts, but the rule proposed did incorporate significant clinical
discretion.
Application of quality-adjusted life year (QALY) weighting
4.27 The committee understood that NICE's interim process and methods of the highly
specialised technologies programme (2017) specifies that a most plausible
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of below £100,000 per QALY gained
for a highly specialised technology is normally considered an effective use of
NHS resources. For a most plausible ICER above £100,000 per QALY gained,
judgements about the acceptability of the highly specialised technology as an
effective use of NHS resources must take account of the magnitude of the
incremental therapeutic improvement. This is seen through the number of
additional QALYs gained and by applying a 'QALY weight'. It understood that a
weight between 1 and 3 can be applied when the QALY gain is between
10 and 30 QALYs. The committee considered that although there was
uncertainty, the undiscounted QALY gains for the scenarios incorporating its
preferred assumptions did not meet the criteria for applying a QALY weight.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Cost-effectiveness results
4.28 The company's base case showed that metreleptin was associated with an ICER
of £60,611 per QALY gained for the overall population. The ICER for generalised
lipodystrophy was £46,000 per QALY gained, and the ICER for partial
lipodystrophy was £81,584 per QALY gained. The total costs and QALYs are
considered by the company to be commercial in confidence and so cannot be
reported here.
4.29 The ERG's base case showed that metreleptin was associated with an ICER of
£110,460 per QALY gained for the overall population. The ICER for generalised
lipodystrophy was £92,593 per QALY gained, and the ICER for partial
lipodystrophy was £130,334 per QALY gained. The total costs and QALYs are
considered by the company to be commercial in confidence and so cannot be
reported here.
4.30 Considering both the company and ERG's scenario analyses, the committee's
preferred assumptions were:
• using the estimate directly obtained from the Delphi data to adjust transition
probabilities in the liver model (rather than liver enzymes, see section 4.19)
• reversing HbA1c to baseline level after stopping treatment (excluding 0.15%
drift, see section 4.23)
• maintaining liver benefit for 1 year when metreleptin is stopped (see
section 4.24)
• removing assumed lifetime maintenance of 50% of quality-of-life treatment
differential and carer utility gain after stopping metreleptin (see section 4.25
and section 4.22)
• correcting number of carers to 1.67 (rather than 2 in company base case, see
section 4.22).
The committee's preferred assumptions were associated with an ICER of
£108,267 per QALY gained (for the overall population). The ICER for
generalised lipodystrophy was £87,545 per QALY gained, and the ICER for
partial lipodystrophy was £133,606 per QALY gained.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Impact of the technology beyond direct health
benefits and on the delivery of the specialised
service
4.31 The committee discussed the effects of metreleptin beyond its direct health
benefits. It understood from patient experts that children with hyperphagia need
considerable carer support, which can have a significant effect on families. It
noted that the treatment may have benefits beyond health in children and young
people with generalised lipodystrophy. They may account for a minority of the
patient population, but the treatment may have important implications for their
schooling, interactions with their parents, and social life. This could lead to
profound psychosocial benefits for individuals. In adults, hyperphagia and fatigue
can compromise their social and professional lives. The committee acknowledged
that lipodystrophy affects patients beyond direct health benefits but that
quantifying this was difficult. However, it concluded that the effects are
qualitatively accounted for in its decision making.
4.32 The committee noted that lipodystrophy is managed in an established specialist
centre at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge. This means that additional
infrastructure or staff training is not expected to be needed to introduce
metreleptin in England.
4.33 The committee noted that the population for which metreleptin is indicated
includes children and young people. It discussed the need to balance the
importance of improving the lives of children and their families with fairness to
people of all ages. It noted the principles that guide the development of NICE
guidance and standards. This emphasises the importance of considering the
distribution of health resources fairly within society as a whole, and factors other
than relative costs and benefits alone. The committee acknowledged and
considered the nature of the population as part of its decision making.
Other factors
4.34 The committee discussed the nature of the condition and to what extent the
severity of lipodystrophy was comparable to other ultra-rare conditions. It

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
understood that hunger was a particular aspect of the condition which caused
substantial impact on quality of life for people with lipodystrophy and was likely
to be associated with other comorbidities.
4.35 It also noted that response to metreleptin is heterogenous between people with
generalised lipodystrophy and partial lipodystrophy. Evidence showed that
metreleptin was associated with greater benefits in people with generalised
lipodystrophy and children with congenital leptin deficiency may keep benefiting
from metreleptin after a long period of treatment (see section 4.14). The
heterogeneity is more obvious in partial lipodystrophy and people with more
severe partial lipodystrophy are likely to benefit more from the treatment. This
was the basis for the company's suggestion of further restricting the metabolic
status of the partial lipodystrophy subgroup to HbA1c above 58 mmol/mol (7.5%),
fasting triglycerides above 5.00 mmol/litre, or both (see section 4.14). The
committee noted that, because the more severe partial lipodystrophy subgroup
was associated with greater benefit, including it in the cost-effectiveness model
was likely to lower the cost-effectiveness estimates. But, the magnitude of that
was difficult to quantify.
Conclusion
4.36 The committee acknowledged that lipodystrophy, and hyperphagia in particular,
has a substantial effect on the quality of life of patients, and their families and
carers. It noted that the clinical evidence suggested metreleptin provides clinical
benefits by reducing blood sugar, triglycerides and liver enzymes in people with
lipodystrophy. The indirect treatment comparison results presented by the
company during the resubmission also indicated that metreleptin was associated
with greater improvement in metabolic outcomes compared with supportive care.
However, there are uncertainties in metreleptin's treatment effect on clinical
outcomes in the long term.
4.37 The committee was generally satisfied with the company's modelling approach in
the resubmission, which was based on established diabetes and fatty liver
frameworks. It was aware that there are uncertainties about transition
probabilities (see section 4.18) and utility values (see section 4.20) sourced from
other disease areas, transition probabilities adjusted by change in HbA1c (see

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
section 4.19), and metreleptin's assumed treatment effect on organ damage and
quality of life after stopping treatment (see sections 4.23, 4.24 and 4.25). It also
noted that metreleptin did not meet the criteria for a QALY weighting to be
applied. The committee acknowledged the uncertainties and took into account
the impact of metreleptin beyond direct health benefits (see section 4.31) and the
likely overestimated cost-effectiveness results (see section 4.14 and
section 4.35). As such, the committee agreed that the ICER of £108,267 per QALY
gained would lower to an acceptable range for metreleptin to be an effective use
of NHS resources. Therefore, the committee concluded that metreleptin can be
considered a cost-effective use of NHS resources for highly specialised
technologies, and recommended metreleptin as an option for treating the
complications of leptin deficiency in lipodystrophy for people who are either
2 years and over with generalised lipodystrophy, or 12 years and over with partial
lipodystrophy with HbA1c above 58 mmol/mol (7.5%), or fasting triglycerides
above 5.0 mmol/litre, or both.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 8(6) of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning groups, NHS England and, with
respect to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE highly specialised technologies guidance. When a NICE highly specialised
technologies guidance recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other
technology, the NHS in Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it
within 2 months of the first publication of the final evaluation document.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraph above. This means that, if a
patient has lipodystrophy and the doctor responsible for their care thinks that
metreleptin is the right treatment, it should be available for use, in line with NICE's
recommendations.

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
6 Evaluation committee members and
NICE project team
Evaluation committee members
The highly specialised technologies evaluation committee is a standing advisory
committee of NICE.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered that there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from
participating further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each evaluation committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
NICE project team
Each highly specialised technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more
health technology analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical
adviser and a project manager.
Aminata Thiam, Orsolya Balogh and Thomas Paling
Technical leads
Raisa Sidhu and Yelan Guo
Technical advisers
Joanne Ekeledo
Project manager

Metreleptin for treating lipodystrophy (HST14)
Update information
June 2021: We added HbA1c levels in mmol/mol to sections 1.2, 4.14, 4.35 and 4.37 of the
guidance, to reflect the units used in clinical practice.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3472-0
