MiraQ cardiac TTFM with high-frequency probe for assessing graft flow during coronary
artery bypass graft surgery 
Overview
NICE has developed a medtech innovation briefing (MIB) on MiraQ cardiac TTFM with
high-frequency probe for assessing graft flow during coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
The information provided includes a description of the technology, how it's used and its
potential role in the treatment pathway. A MIB also includes a review of relevant published
evidence and the likely costs of using the technologies, but they are not NICE guidance
and do not make any recommendations on the value of using the technologies.

 
Summary
• The technology described in this briefing is the MiraQ cardiac transit time flowmetry
(TTFM) and high-frequency ultrasound (HFUS) system. It is used for intraoperative
quality assessment of graft blood flow during coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery for people with coronary heart disease.
• The innovative aspect is the L15 HFUS imaging probe that is designed to improve
near-field imaging and is applied directly to the cardiac tissue.
• The intended place in therapy would be as an alternative to clinical assessment in
people undergoing CABG surgery.
• The main points from the evidence summarised in this briefing are from 4 studies (1
multicentre observational registry, 1 secondary analysis, 1 prospective study and 1
retrospective observational study) including a total of 1,134 people undergoing CABG
surgery. They show that MiraQ cardiac with TTFM and HFUS may improve the quality
and efficacy of the CABG procedure.
• Key uncertainties around the evidence or technology are that there is limited UK NHS
evidence and none of the studies included a comparator.
• Experts advised that the main benefits of the technology are providing surgeons with
detailed objective information about the graft condition and graft flow, and helping
them detect the position of deep lying arteries during the procedure. These may
reduce long-term graft failure, and the risk of bleeding and intraoperative
complications.
• Safety issues identified with the MiraQ system are that there have been incidences
when flow measurement channels incorrectly indicated that the flow is too high or too
low, which could cause surgeons to make unnecessary changes and potentially lead to
graft failure. The instructions for use have been updated to address the problem.
• The cost of the MiraQ cardiac TTFM and HFUS system is £81,550 per unit, the L15
imaging probe is £8,365 and the TTFM probe is £1,720 (excluding VAT). Standard care
is clinical assessment of graft flow using a variety of techniques, which are selected
based on surgeon preference.

 
The technology
MiraQ cardiac (Medistim) combines transit time flow measurement (TTFM) and high-
frequency ultrasound (HFUS) modalities within a single system. Surgical findings can be
documented through flow tracing and images provided by the system. It is intended for
intraoperative quality assessment of graft blood flow during coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG) surgery. The system consists of 2 probes. The L15 HFUS imaging probe has a
frequency range of 11 MHz to 18 MHz and provides high-resolution images that allow the
surgeon to assess morphology, including the cannulation or clamping site of the aorta, and
to evaluate the completed bypass anastomosis. The TTFM probe uses transit time
technology to accurately measure blood flow intraoperatively. It measures 3 parameters of
transit time flow (mean blood flow in ml per minute, pulsatility index and diastolic filling
percentage) to assess graft blood flow and check graft patency. A microcomputer with a
touchscreen mounted on a moveable trolley is used to control the probes and store their
outputs.
There is another version available, the MiraQ TTFM system, that does not include HFUS.
This version has been evaluated separately in NICE's medical technologies guidance on
MiraQ for assessing graft flow during CABG surgery and is not part of this briefing.
Innovations
The company claims that the L15 imaging probe is designed to improve near-field imaging
using HFUS and is applied directly to the cardiac tissue. The company also claims that
intraoperative quality assessment and surgical guidance using HFUS is more likely to lead
to a positive outcome and decrease the chance for additional surgical reinterventions.
Current care pathway
Coronary artery disease is a common cause of symptoms, disability and death. It is caused
by atherosclerosis, which leads to stenosis or occlusion of the coronary arteries. NICE's
guideline on stable angina: management recommends that revascularisation of the
blocked coronary arteries using CABG or percutaneous coronary interventions should be
considered in people whose symptoms are not satisfactorily controlled by medical
treatment.
CABG surgery aims to bypass narrowed or blocked segments of the coronary arteries

 
using grafts. Grafts are usually constructed from lengths of the patient's own long
saphenous vein or internal mammary artery, although other blood vessels are also used.
Cardiac surgeons use a variety of techniques to avoid technical problems during CABG
surgery, but assessment of graft flow is usually subjective. Techniques used vary
according to the graft used, the surgical technique, and the surgeon's individual
preference. They include the surgeon assessing resistance and perfusion beyond a graft
by flushing fluid through it before restoring flow, and observing and palpating grafts for
pulsation when blood flow has been re-established.
The following publications have been identified as relevant to this care pathway:
• NICE's guideline on stable angina: management
• NICE's guideline on acute coronary syndromes
• European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European Association for Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery (EACTS) guidelines on myocardial revascularization.
Population, setting and intended user
The MiraQ cardiac TTFM and HFUS system is intended for use in people with coronary
artery disease undergoing CABG surgery.
The technology is used by cardiovascular surgeons, with nurses operating the system. It is
used in tertiary care during cardiac surgery.
The company states that both the surgeon and the operator of the MiraQ cardiac system
need to be trained in using the system. The training is provided by the company and is
included in the cost of the device.
Costs
Technology costs
• MiraQ cardiac TTFM and HFUS system: £81,550
• unit cost L15 imaging probe: £8,365

 
• unit cost TTFM probe: £1,720
• annual maintenance costs (based on 10-year lifetime): £2,086.
Costs of standard care
Standard care is clinical assessment of graft flow using a variety of techniques, which are
selected based on surgeon preference. These usually involve minimal or no extra cost.
Resource consequences
The company states that MiraQ cardiac with TTFM and HFUS is used in 6 NHS trusts.
The company claims that using the MiraQ cardiac TTFM and HFUS system reduces
postoperative deaths and re-hospitalisations when compared with both CABG surgery
alone and CABG surgery with the MiraQ TTFM system.
The company states that there are no practical difficulties or changes in facilities and
infrastructure associated with adopting MiraQ. It is a standalone system that only needs an
electrical output socket.
Regulatory information
MiraQ cardiac transit time flow measurement and high-frequency ultrasound system is a
CE-marked class IIa medical device, and the probes used with the MiraQ system are CE-
marked class III.
There is a field safety notice on Medistim ASA: VeriQ, MiraQ. Medistim is aware of
incidences when flow measurement channels on Medistim devices have been operating
with a significant zero-point offset value. The result is that flow measurements recorded
with these channels will indicate that the flow is too high or too low. This might result in
worse patient outcomes. Exploration of the issue has shown that this malfunction was
caused by electrostatic discharge (ESD) damaging a component in the measurement chain
on the Medistim systems, causing an offset from zero. Medistim tests the ESD resistance
during compliance testing to ensure the system meets electromedical safety standard
requirements. However, the incidences noted above have shown that severe ESD can
surpass these requirements. Medistim has therefore further issued updated instructions

 
for use which clarify the importance of routinely performing the probe and system
functionality test before use to ensure that they function properly.
Equality considerations
NICE is committed to promoting equality of opportunity, eliminating unlawful discrimination
and fostering good relations between people with particular protected characteristics and
others.
The MiraQ cardiac transit time flowmetry and high-frequency ultrasound system is
intended for people with coronary artery disease who are having coronary artery bypass
graft surgery. High blood pressure, high cholesterol, high levels of lipoprotein(a), smoking,
physical inactivity, diabetes and being overweight increase the risk of developing coronary
heart disease. Older people, people who are male and people of South Asian family origin
are also more likely to develop coronary heart disease. Age, disability, sex and race are
protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010.
Clinical and technical evidence
A literature search was carried out for this briefing in accordance with the interim process
and methods statement for medtech innovation briefings. This briefing includes the most
relevant or best available published evidence relating to the clinical effectiveness of the
technology. Further information about how the evidence for this briefing was selected is
available on request by contacting mibs@nice.org.uk.
Published evidence
Four studies are summarised in this briefing, which include a total of 1,134 people.
All studies are single-arm studies without a comparator. The evidence consists of 1
multicentre observational registry (Taggart et al. 2020), which has 1 secondary analysis
from this data (Rosenfeld et al. 2021a), 1 prospective study (Wendt et al. 2019) and 1
retrospective observational study (Kim et al. 2020).
There is 1 secondary analysis that is not summarised below because it includes people
with chronic and end-stage renal disease undergoing coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)

 
surgery (Rosenfeld et al. 2021b).
The clinical evidence and its strengths and limitations are summarised in the overall
assessment of the evidence.
Overall assessment of the evidence
The evidence for the technology is of low to moderate quality. None of the studies have a
comparator and there is limited evidence in an NHS setting (1 centre). Some of the
evidence is on VeriQ C, which is a previous version of the technology. The evidence
suggests that MiraQ cardiac with transit time flowmetry (TTFM) and high-frequency
ultrasound (HFUS) may improve the quality and efficacy of the CABG procedure.
Comparative evidence on patient outcomes would be beneficial.
Taggart et al. (2020)
Study size, design and location
A multicentre prospective observational registry of 1,016 people diagnosed with
multivessel coronary artery disease who were scheduled for isolated coronary artery
bypass graft surgery in 7 centres in Europe and North America.
Intervention and comparator
MiraQ cardiac or VeriQ C devices with TTFM and HFUS, no comparator.
Key outcomes
HFUS was used to assess the ascending aorta in 79.3% (806 out of 1,016) of people, the in
situ conduits in 65.1% (661 out of 1,016), the coronary targets in 47.5% (483 out of 1,016)
and completed grafts in 59.3% (602 out of 1,016). People who had off-pump surgery had
HFUS more frequently (88.3%) compared with people who had on-pump surgery (73.5%).
The primary outcome of the study was any change in planned surgical procedure as a
result of imaging with TTFM or HFUS, or from visual assessment. A surgical change was
made in 256 people. Of these, in 77% (197 out of 256) this was a result of TTFM or HFUS.
Of these, surgical changes were made to the aorta in 74 of 80 people (92.5%), to in situ
conduits in 10 of 18 people (55.6%), to the proposed coronary target in 73 of 109 people

 
(67.0%) and to grafts in 51 of 79 people (64.6%). In-hospital adverse event rates were 0.3%
for myocardial infarction, 0.6% for mortality and 1.0% for cerebral events.
Strengths and limitations
The study suggests that TTFM and HFUS may improve the quality, safety and efficacy of
CABG procedures. One of the centres was based in the UK. The main author has received
research funding, speaking and travelling fees from the company. Seven out of the other 9
authors received travelling support or speaker fees from the company. A limitation of the
study is that the outcomes were limited to in-hospital reporting and no further follow up
was done.
Rosenfeld et al. (2021)
Study size, design and location
A retrospective review of the REQUEST registry of 1,016 people diagnosed with multivessel
coronary artery disease who were scheduled for isolated coronary artery bypass graft
surgery in 7 centres in Europe and North America.
Intervention and comparator
MiraQ cardiac or VeriQ C devices with TTFM and HFUS, no comparator.
Key outcomes
This study focused on 3 sub-analyses, comparing on-pump (ONCAB, n=402) with off-
pump procedures (OPCAB, n=614), arterial versus venous grafts, and grafts to different
territories. There were more surgical changes to the ascending aorta in OPCAB (14.7%)
compared with ONCAB (3.4%) procedures (odds ratio [OR] 4.03; 95% confidence interval
[CI] 2.32 to 7.20). Strategy changes for in situ conduits occurred less in OPCAB (0.2%)
versus ONCAB (2.8%) procedures (OR 0.09; 95% CI 0.01 to 0.56). Changes to coronary
targets did not differ between groups (10.4% versus 10.9%; OR 0.95; 95% CI 0.62 to 1.46).
However, when comparing only people that underwent HFUS scanning, there were more
target location changes in OPCAB (28.6%) versus ONCAB (19.9%) procedures (OR 1.63;
95% CI 1.02 to 2.62). In all study participants, revisions were more common for arterial
versus venous grafts (4.7% versus 2.4%; OR 2.05; 95% CI 1.29 to 3.37), and inferior versus
anterior (5.1% versus 2.9%; OR 1.77; 95% CI 1.08 to 2.89) and lateral (5.1% versus 2.8%; OR

 
1.83; 95% CI 1.04 to 3.27) territory grafts.
Strengths and limitations
This study is a secondary analysis of Taggart et al. (2020). It suggests that compared with
ONCAB, OPCAB procedures resulted in 4 times more changes related to the ascending
aorta. An additional limitation to those mentioned above is that the study did not compare
CABG procedures with or without the MiraQ cardiac TTFM and HFUS system because of
the nature of the study.
Wendt et al. (2019)
Study size, design and location
A prospective study of 65 people undergoing CABG surgery in Germany.
Intervention and comparator
MiraQ cardiac with TTFM and HFUS, no comparator.
Key outcomes
A surgical strategy change, based on imaging, was done in 10 procedures (15%). Changes
related to the cannulation site (n=3), the target opening site (n=2) and the clamping site
(n=1). In 3 cases, imaging was used to identify the left anterior descending artery, and in 1
case the imaging confirmed a calcified vessel and a procedure was done to treat the
calcification. In 1 case, the graft was revised. Thirty-day mortality was 0% and no stroke
was observed.
Strengths and limitations
This study suggests that MiraQ TTFM and HFUS was helpful in evaluating the clamping or
cannulation site, the potential opening site of the vessel or the completed anastomosis. A
limitation is that the main aim of the study was to evaluate MiraQ TTFM and HFUS in
relation to postoperative troponin-I release.

 
Kim et al. (2020)
Study size, design and location
A retrospective observational study of 53 people undergoing CABG in Korea.
Intervention and comparator
VeriQ C system, no comparator.
Key outcomes
In total, the quality of 141 distal anastomoses was evaluated, of which 123 with normal
TTFM results also had good ultrasound findings. Abnormal TTFM findings, including low
flow or high pulsatility index, were found in 18 distal anastomoses. The epicardial
ultrasound identified that only 3 of these needed revisions. Revisions were not done for
the other 15 distal anastomoses and at 1 year after surgery, all 15 of these were patent.
The abnormal TTFM results were false positives for 15 of 18 distal anastomoses (83.3%).
Epicardial ultrasound was also used to evaluate 32 target epicardial arteries in 30 people
to identify the appropriate anastomosis sites. For 5 anastomoses, the target vessels were
changed to adjacent vessels based on the ultrasound findings. The early and 1-year
overall graft patency rates were 100% (141 anastomoses) and 96.1% (122 of 127
anastomoses), respectively. The early mortality rate was 1.9% (1 of 53 people). Overall,
postoperative complications included new-onset atrial fibrillation (n=13; 24.5%),
respiratory complications (n=3; 5.7%), low cardiac output syndrome (n=2; 3.8%), and acute
kidney injury (n=2; 3.8%).
Strengths and limitations
This study suggests that epicardial ultrasound scanning may be beneficial during CABG
surgery to confirm the quality of the surgery and potentially reduce additional procedures.
A limitation is that the procedures were done by 1 surgeon.
Sustainability
The company claims the technology will reduce the use of single-use equipment related to
the surgical procedure by reducing the need for repeat vascularisation (repeat CABG or

 
percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI]) and the ionising radiation connected to PCI.
Both the TTFM and HFUS probes can be used on multiple patients after cleaning and
sterilisation. There is no published evidence to support these claims.
Recent and ongoing studies
Flow distribution in arterial composite grafts in patients with coronary heart disease
undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. ACTRN12622000774729. Status: not yet
recruiting. Indication: coronary heart disease leading to coronary artery bypass grafting.
Devices: MiraQ TTFM and HFUS. Estimated completion date: not reported. Country: Czech
Republic.
Expert comments
Comments on this technology were invited from clinical experts working in the field and
relevant patient organisations. The comments received are individual opinions and do not
represent NICE's view.
Two out of 3 experts were familiar with or had used this technology before.
Level of innovation
Two clinical experts commented that the technology has been around for some time,
about 20 years. One expert said that other modalities offer the same information but at no
extra cost and 1 expert said that MiraQ cardiac is the most user-friendly form that this
technology has been presented in. The other expert said that MiraQ cardiac is a useful tool
for quality control of anastomotic issues. Two experts described the standard care used in
clinical practice, which includes assessment of graft adequacy and flow by: changes in
electrocardiogram measurements and haemodynamic parameters, infusing cardioplegia
through a conduit during the procedure and palpation of the conduit. Two of the clinical
experts stated that the technology would be used in addition to standard care and 1 said
that it has the potential to replace standard care.
Potential patient impact
Two experts said that the primary benefit of the technology for patients is providing

 
surgeons with detailed objective information about the graft condition and graft flow. This
information can be used to make necessary changes to improve blood flow in the graft
and potentially reduce long-term graft failure. One expert also highlighted the ability of the
technology to detect the position of deep lying arteries, which prevents the surgeon from
making unnecessary dissections during the procedure. This may reduce the risk of
bleeding and intraoperative complications. Based on this aspect of detection, 1 expert said
that the technology is most appropriate for use in people with known peripheral vascular
disease and another expert said that it would provide more benefit in people with calcified
vessels or small vessels with a high syntax score.
Potential system impact
One expert said that the technology has the potential to standardise the methods used in
practice, which are currently subjective and not evidence-based. This expert added that
the potential to reduce future cardiac events would mean fewer hospital visits, which
would free up resource. All of the experts agreed that the technology will initially cost
significantly more than standard care. This is because of the cost of purchasing the
technology and disposables, training theatre nursing staff and surgeons, and the extra
time required to perform flow measurements and ultrasound assessment. One expert felt
that the long-term cost impact would be equal to or less than standard care.
General comments
All 3 experts agreed that the technology would not require any specific changes to
facilities and infrastructure, though 2 experts noted that storage space within the
operating theatre would be needed. They also agreed that training would be required to
achieve competency with the device. One of the experts highlighted that the technology
does not automatically record blood pressure during the flow measurement and that this
would be useful for retrospective analyses of outcomes. They also said that a small portion
of the left internal mammary artery must be prepared for placing the flow probe around
the vessel. If this step is not done before the procedure and instead done at the end, this
could cause damage to the mammary artery and cause bleeding. All 3 experts suggested
that larger studies are needed to determine both the clinical and cost effectiveness of the
technology, including in different patient groups. Two experts said that the technology
would be needed for all coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) procedures done in the NHS,
which is approximately 15,000 a year.