=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "myocardial-perfusion-scintigraphy-for-the-diagnosis-and-management-of-angina-and-myocardial-infarction-pdf-2294756838853.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:47:22.388477",
  "file_size_bytes": 153570,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/myocardial-perfusion-scintigraphy-for-the-diagnosis-and-management-of-angina-and-myocardial-infarction-pdf-2294756838853.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy for the
diagnosis and management
of angina and myocardial
infarction
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 26 November 2003
Last updated: 1 July 2011
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta73

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
This guidance is partially replaced by CG95 and CG126.
1 Recommendations
This appraisal covers the use of myocardial perfusion scintigraphy (MPS) using single
photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in the diagnosis and management of
angina and myocardial infarction. It does not cover planar MPS or the use of MPS in the
management of heart failure or in the assessment of myocardial viability. In this guidance,
the term coronary artery disease (CAD) is used to refer to angina and myocardial
infarction.
1.1 This recommendation has been updated and replaced by recommendation 1.3.6.1
in NICE's guideline on recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin.
1.2 MPS using SPECT is recommended as part of the investigational strategy in the
management of established CAD in people who remain symptomatic following
myocardial infarction or reperfusion interventions.
This recommendation has been partially updated by recommendations 1.5.2 and
1.5.12 in NICE's guideline on stable angina.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
2 Clinical need and practice
2.1 Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the commonest cause of death in England and
Wales. It is characterised by the development of lipid-laden coronary arterial
plaques, which reduce the blood supply to the heart muscle. Significant CAD is
defined as a stenosis (narrowing) of more than 70% of the diameter of at least 1
major epicardial artery segment or more than 50% of the diameter of the left main
coronary artery.
2.2 Angina (chest pain) is the most common symptom of CAD. It is usually provoked
by exercise and relieved by rest. Angina of rapidly increasing frequency, or
experienced at rest, is called unstable angina. CAD can also lead to heart attack
(myocardial infarction, MI) and sudden cardiac death. MI is characterised by
severe chest pain persisting for at least 20 minutes, a rise in cardiac enzymes in
the serum, and/or an abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG).
2.3 About 2.65 million people in the UK have CAD, and of these 1.2 million have had
an MI. There were an estimated 275,000 heart attacks in the UK in 2001, and
335,000 new cases of angina are diagnosed each year. CAD is more prevalent in
men than in women. The prevalence of CAD increases with age, and varies
across geographic regions and socioeconomic groups.
2.4 Preventative strategies for reducing the frequency of CAD include smoking
cessation, diet modification, exercise, and treating conditions that exacerbate
progression of the disease, such as hyperlipidaemia, hyperglycaemia,
hypertension and blood hypercoagulability. Medical treatment of angina
symptoms includes the use of nitrates, beta-adrenergic blockers and/or calcium
channel blockers. In severe CAD, revascularisation may be required, using
surgical procedures such as coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or via the
use of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), commonly with the insertion of
an intraluminal coronary stent.
2.5 The cost of CAD to the UK healthcare system in 1999 was estimated in the
Assessment Report (see Appendix B) at £1.7 billion; the total annual cost was
around £7 billion when informal care and productivity losses were included. More
than 378,000 inpatients were treated for CAD in NHS hospitals in 2000 to 2001.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Approximately 28,500 CABG and 39,000 PCI procedures are performed each
year in the UK.
2.6 The individual likelihood for CAD can be estimated from age, gender, ethnic
group, family history, existence of symptoms, associated comorbidities and the
results of tests such as resting electrocardiography (rECG). rECG is a commonly
used test because it is readily available in primary care and is inexpensive, but
because it does not exclude CAD, it is of limited diagnostic value. Stress ECG
(sECG) and coronary angiography (CA) are commonly used in clinical practice for
the diagnosis of CAD.
2.7 sECG is normally recorded during progressive exercise on a treadmill, and so is
not suitable for people for whom treadmill exercise is difficult or impossible.
2.8 CA involves manipulating a cardiac catheter into the heart from a vein or artery in
a limb. A contrast medium is injected through the catheter, and its progress
monitored by a rapid series of X-rays. CA provides mainly anatomical information
and is used to measure the degree of stenosis. It is considered the 'gold
standard' for defining the site and severity of coronary artery lesions. However,
CA findings are not always a reliable indicator of the functional significance of a
coronary stenosis. Routine use of CA without prior non-invasive testing is not
advisable, because of its high cost and associated mortality and morbidity.
Potential complications include non-fatal MI (0.1%), stroke (0.1%) and death (0.1%
to 0.2%).
2.9 Other frequently used non-invasive techniques include myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy (MPS) and echocardiography. Imaging techniques such as magnetic
resonance imaging and positron emission tomography are used less frequently.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
3 The technology
3.1 MPS involves the intravenous injection of small amounts of a radioactive tracer to
evaluate perfusion of living cardiac muscle via the coronary arteries after stress
and at rest. After injection, the tracer is taken up by cardiac muscle cells, and its
distribution within the myocardium is imaged using a gamma camera. Three
tracers are commercially available in the UK: thallium-201 thallous chloride,
technetium-99m 2-methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile, and technetium-99m
1,2-bis(bis[2-ethoxyethyl]phosphino)ethane. MPS is a non-invasive procedure
which provides more detailed information about coronary function than sECG and
CA. Cardiovascular stress can be induced by exercise as in sECG, but is most
commonly induced by pharmacological agents.
3.2 MPS was originally developed as a planar imaging technique, but SPECT is the
clinical standard in current practice. In SPECT, the camera rotates around the
patient for 10 to 20 minutes and the raw data are processed to obtain
tomographic images of the myocardium. The stress and rest images are normally
separated by 3 to 4 hours. The total patient contact time for stress induction,
injection and image acquisition is approximately 60 minutes.
3.3 Homogeneous uptake of tracer throughout the myocardium indicates the
absence of clinically significant infarction or coronary stenosis. A defect in the
stress images that normalises in the rest images usually corresponds to a
significant coronary stenosis. A defect in both stress and rest images indicates an
area with loss of viable myocardium, such as after MI.
3.4 Two technical improvements to SPECT were also considered in this appraisal.
Attenuation-corrected SPECT compensates for the fact that many emitted
photons never reach the detector as a result of interactions with body tissues.
ECG-gated SPECT is synchronised with the patient's ECG, thereby minimising
artefacts caused by cardiac motion. Also, left ventricular ejection fraction can be
measured at rest with ECG-gated SPECT.
3.5 The complication rates for SPECT are no different from those of sECG, and are
usually related to exercise or pharmacological stimulation given as part of the
stress component in the procedure, with an associated mortality of around 0.01%

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
and a morbidity of around 0.02%. The radiation exposure from SPECT is similar to
the exposure from uncomplicated CA.
3.6 The cost of a SPECT scan is estimated to be around £265, whereas the costs for
sECG and CA are £104 and £1,103, respectively (2002 NHS reference costs).

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
4 Evidence and interpretation
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence from a number of sources.
4.1 Clinical effectiveness
4.1.1 The Assessment Report and the submissions reviewed the literature and focused
on 2 aspects separately: the diagnostic performance of SPECT, and its long-term
prognostic value. Much of the evidence consisted of non-randomised open
observational (both prospective and retrospective) studies, with several studies
using a comparative design.
Diagnostic performance
4.1.2 The diagnostic performance of SPECT was expressed as sensitivity and
specificity. Sensitivity is the proportion of true-positives that are correctly
identified by the test. Specificity is the proportion of true-negatives that are
correctly identified by the test.
4.1.3 The Assessment Report reviewed 21 studies with 100 or more patients that
evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of both SPECT and sECG in the diagnosis
of CAD compared with CA. Median sensitivity values for SPECT were higher than
those for sECG in all studies (SPECT: 81% for the largest subcategory of studies,
with a range of 63% to 93%; sECG: 65% for the largest subcategory of studies,
with a range of 42% to 92%). However, the results were not pooled because of
the heterogeneity across the different studies. Median specificity values were
similar for SPECT (65%, range 10% to 90%) and sECG (67%, range 41% to 88%).
4.1.4 The submission from the professional groups reviewed the diagnostic
performance of SPECT only (compared with CA) from 62 studies. Because of
differences in inclusion criteria, only 2 of these studies were also included in the
Assessment Report analysis. There was considerable variation in study size,
quality and design, but weighted means for sensitivity and specificity were
reported to be 86% and 74%, respectively. The manufacturer's submission quoted

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
1 publication with sensitivity and specificity for SPECT reported as 91% and 89%,
respectively, and the American College of Cardiologists and American Heart
Association Task Force guideline, with average sensitivity and specificity
reported as 89% to 90% and 70% to 76%, respectively.
Long-term prognostic value
4.1.5 For the long-term prognostic value of SPECT, the Assessment Report included a
systematic review of 46 observational studies.
4.1.6 In the 20 studies that provided general prognostic information, cardiac event
rates (defined as cardiac mortality or non-fatal MI) were significantly higher for
patients with abnormal SPECT scans than for those with normal scans. An
abnormal SPECT result was associated with an annual cardiac event rate of 6.7%,
whereas a normal scan was associated with an annual cardiac event rate of 0.7%
(data from meta-analyses of 15,000 and 20,963 patients, respectively).
Furthermore, the extent and size of a perfusion defect can predict the likelihood
of future cardiac events.
4.1.7 The proportion of normal angiograms was lower in patients who were referred to
CA after a positive SPECT than in patients referred directly for CA (2 studies: 33%
versus 43% [4,688 patients], and 18% versus 33% [6,800 patients], respectively).
4.1.8 However, the rate of subsequent revascularisations was lower for the SPECT-CA
strategy (13% to 27%) than for the direct CA strategy (16% to 44%; data from 3
studies with a combined total of approximately 11,000 patients).
4.1.9 In studies where it was possible to analyse the contribution of different clinical
parameters to the prediction of clinical outcomes, it was found that SPECT
provided independent prognostic information for predicting MI, and had an
additional value over clinical and sECG data that was maintained at long-term
follow-up.
4.1.10 In several studies that investigated whether an abnormal SPECT scan was a
predictor of cardiac death, the relative risk or odds ratios were calculated
depending on study design. In all studies an abnormal SPECT scan was described

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
as an independent, main or statistically significant predictor of cardiac death. In 4
studies, with patient numbers ranging from 176 to 947, the relative risk ranged
between 1.1 and 17.6. In 2 studies, with patient numbers of 248 and 1,182, the
odds ratios were reported to be 2.8 and 4.8, respectively.
4.1.11 SPECT also provided independent prognostic information in the following
subgroups: women (5 studies), patients post-MI (4 studies), patients who had
undergone PCI or CABG (3 studies), medically treated patients with left main and/
or 3-vessel CAD (1 study), patients hospitalised with angina who had a normal or
non-diagnostic sECG (1 study), and patients with diabetes (2 studies).
4.1.12 Two studies found ECG-gated SPECT to be more sensitive than non-ECG-gated
SPECT, but with slightly lower specificity. Also, ECG-gated SPECT provided
incremental prognostic information in patients with known or suspected CAD that
was better than perfusion data alone. One study compared SPECT with
attenuation-corrected SPECT and reported that attenuation correction had a
significant impact on the assessment of the severity and extent of MI.
4.1.13 The search strategy used in the Assessment Report did not identify any studies
evaluating the role of SPECT in the context of rapid access chest pain clinics or in
pre-operative risk assessment of patients undergoing major surgery who were
potentially at risk of coronary events. However, the submission from the
professional groups lists 20 studies on SPECT in pre-operative risk assessment,
and emphasises the acknowledged role of SPECT for this indication.
4.1.14 In summary, as studies reviewed in the Assessment Report were carried out
under a number of different clinical settings investigating different outcomes, it
was not possible to summarise the effectiveness of SPECT in simple quantitative
estimates. However, the evidence from the reviewed studies consistently
suggested that SPECT provided valuable independent and incremental
information predictive of outcome that helped to risk-stratify patients and
influence the way in which their condition was managed.
4.1.15 The submissions from the professional groups and the manufacturer included
reviews of a larger number of papers and, because of differences in the inclusion
criteria, there was little overlap between the studies included in each of the 3
reviews. Despite the differences in the evidence base of the 3 reviews, similar

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
conclusions were drawn.
4.2 Cost effectiveness
4.2.1 The Assessment Group, the manufacturer and the professional group reviewed
published cost-effectiveness studies. The Assessment Group and the
manufacturer also provided new economic models.
4.2.2 The systematic review in the Assessment Report included studies that compared
both costs and outcomes of SPECT with alternative diagnostic strategies. The
comparison of different publications was complicated by the multitude of
strategies considered, differences in study designs and populations, in treatment
comparisons, in costing methods and different ways in which outcomes were
measured. Overall, it was concluded that direct CA (without any prior tests) was
cost effective when the prevalence of disease was high. At low levels of
prevalence, strategies involving SPECT and/or sECG were considered to be a
better use of resources than a strategy of direct CA. Furthermore, strategies
involving SPECT were often found to be dominant or provided additional benefits
that might be considered worth the additional cost compared with the sECG-CA
strategy.
4.2.3 The new economic models provided by the Assessment Group and the
manufacturer used similar designs; decision tree models were constructed for the
diagnostic performance of different strategies and Markov models were used to
estimate the long-term costs and benefits. They both used a hypothetical cohort
of 1,000 patients (to start at the age of 60), with the assumption that
effectiveness of therapy (CABG, PCI, medical management) lasts for 10 years.
The time horizon was 25 years with an annual cycle time.
4.2.4 The diagnostic strategies considered in both models were:
• sECG, followed by SPECT if sECG was positive or indeterminate, followed by
CA if SPECT was positive or non-diagnostic (sECG-SPECT-CA)
• sECG, followed by CA if sECG was positive or non-diagnostic (sECG-CA)
• SPECT, followed by CA if SPECT was positive or non-diagnostic (SPECT-CA)

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
• direct CA (CA).
4.2.5 The results were presented as incremental cost per true-positive diagnosed, per
accurate diagnosis, per life year gained and per quality-adjusted life year (QALY)
gained, and – importantly – were calculated for different levels of prevalence of
CAD.
4.2.6 The key results were as follows:
• As prevalence of CAD increased, total cost increased and total number of
QALYs gained decreased for each diagnostic strategy.
• At all prevalence levels of CAD the ordering of diagnostic strategies was the
same, with sECG-SPECT-CA being least costly and least effective, and
having the lowest average cost per QALY. This implies that an incremental
cost is paid for some incremental benefit when SPECT is not included.
• CA was the most costly strategy in both models and for all prevalence levels
of CAD, and (as the reference standard) was defined as the most effective
strategy.
• Most incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were less favourable in
the manufacturer's model than in the Assessment Report model. However, all
ICERs calculated were less than £24,000, apart from the ICER for direct CA
compared with SPECT-CA at low and 30% prevalence of CAD.
4.2.7 When compared with sECG-CA at low prevalence of CAD, the ICER for SPECT-CA
(£8,723) was more favourable than the ICER for direct CA (£21,538). Conversely,
at high prevalence of CAD, the more favourable strategy was direct CA with an
ICER of £1,962, whilst SPECT-CA had an ICER of £3,242.
4.2.8 When direct CA was compared with the SPECT-CA strategy, a high ICER was
seen at low prevalence (£42,225). However, as prevalence increased, direct CA
became increasingly more cost-effective. At 80% prevalence of CAD, the move to
the direct CA from SPECT-CA involved a modest extra cost per additional QALY
gained (£942 in the Assessment Report and £4,482 in the manufacturer's
submission).

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
4.2.9 Several sensitivity analyses showed that the results varied considerably
depending on the sensitivity or specificity values entered for SPECT and sECG.
When the impact of the additional independent information provided by SPECT
was explored by increasing the proportion of SPECT positives whose condition
could be satisfactorily managed medically, ICERs generally improved. When the
time horizon was less than 15 years, all ICERs became less favourable. In the
subgroup analysis for women, the SPECT-CA strategy dominated both the sECG-
CA and CA strategies.
4.2.10 In summary, when compared with sECG-CA, SPECT-CA has more favourable
ICERs than direct CA at low levels of prevalence of CAD. At higher prevalence
levels, the sECG-CA and CA strategies lead to more favourable ICERs than
SPECT-CA.
4.3 Consideration of the evidence
4.3.1 The Committee reviewed the evidence available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of MPS for the diagnosis and management of CAD, having
considered evidence on the value placed by users on the benefits of MPS for the
diagnosis and management of CAD, from people with CAD, those who represent
them, and clinical experts. It was also mindful of the need to ensure that its
advice took account of the effective use of NHS resources.
4.3.2 The Committee considered the evidence submitted on the diagnostic
performance of SPECT indicating that, overall, it is more sensitive than sECG.
However, the Committee appreciated that considerable uncertainty remains over
the true values for sensitivity and specificity of SPECT. In particular, trials that
assessed these values were subject to referral bias, in that only SPECT-positive
cases were referred for CA, which was assumed to be the 'gold standard'.
Additionally, the Committee was aware that, contrary to SPECT, CA does not
always provide the fullest evaluation of the patient with CAD, particularly where
information relating to myocardial perfusion and function are considered
important for the establishment of prognosis and management.
4.3.3 The Committee heard from the clinical experts that SPECT is of value at all levels
of likelihood for CAD, because it provides highly accurate diagnostic and

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
prognostic information. The experts indicated that, if SPECT and sECG were
equally accessible in the NHS, there would be a case for the preferential use of
SPECT in certain groups of patients. However, because of the currently limited
availability of SPECT in the UK, the committee believed that its use should be
particularly directed to patient groups for whom it provides the greatest
additional benefit in terms of initial diagnosis of suspected CAD and in the
management and prediction of prognosis in those with established CAD.
4.3.4 The Committee also recognised that there are circumstances where the
information from sECG is important, as in the evaluation of the overall exercise
performance of patients with CAD. sECG is therefore likely to remain a commonly
used investigation in most circumstances.
4.3.5 The Committee reviewed the cost-effectiveness modelling. They noted that
because the difference in QALYs derived between the different investigational
strategies was small, and the disutility of CA was not included in the models, the
conclusions of cost–utility differences between diagnostic strategies (see Section
4.2.4) should be interpreted with caution. However, the Committee considered
that, overall, SPECT was cost effective across a wide range of clinical situations.
4.3.6 The Committee further considered that, in terms of both clinical effectiveness
and cost effectiveness, the absolute 'value' of SPECT as an appropriate
diagnostic tool depends on the likelihood of the presence of CAD in the target
population under investigation. Thus, the diagnostic strategy SPECT-CA is clearly
preferred on cost-effectiveness grounds in individuals with a lower likelihood of
CAD and consequently lower risk of future coronary events. However, as the
likelihood of CAD increases, differences in the incremental cost effectiveness for
the different testing strategies decrease. Thus, at higher likelihood of CAD and of
possible intervention (CABG or PCI), a strategy where direct CA is preferred over
SPECT-CA could be considered more appropriate.
4.3.7 The Committee heard from the experts that SPECT enables the redirection of
patients into medical rather than surgical management. SPECT may therefore
postpone or completely avert the need for CA in some clinical situations. The
Committee also recognised the significance of the disutility associated with CA,
which would favour SPECT and had been omitted from the economic models
reviewed. It concluded that full consideration of these aspects is likely to improve

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
the cost effectiveness of SPECT.
4.3.8 The Committee was advised by the experts that SPECT scanning may be
particularly useful as an initial diagnostic tool in people for whom sECG poses
particular problems of poor sensitivity or difficulties with interpretation. This
includes women, patients with cardiac conduction defects (such as left bundle
branch block) and people with diabetes. SPECT also has an important role in
assessing the presence of CAD in patients for whom treadmill exercise is difficult
or impossible, and in the full evaluation of patients following MI or reperfusion
interventions.
4.3.9 The Committee considered that increased provision of SPECT within the NHS
over that currently available was desirable on the basis of this evidence.
However, it recognised that more widespread use of SPECT would require an
implementation strategy that may take several years to fulfil and would need a
significant increase in the availability of both equipment and trained staff. The
Committee therefore concluded that the increased use of SPECT should initially
be targeted at those groups for whom it provides the greatest benefit in terms of
cost effectiveness, as expressed in section 1.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
5 Recommendations for further research
5.1 Further research is recommended in patients with established CAD regarding the
value of SPECT relative to other tests of cardiac function such as
echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission
tomography in order to inform future assessment of the needs of the NHS.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
6 Implications for the NHS
6.1 According to the British Nuclear Cardiology Society survey, there were about
1,200 SPECT scans per million population in the UK in 2000. The average waiting
time for a scan was 20 weeks. The submission prepared jointly by the
professional groups estimated the optimal level of SPECT provision to be around
4,000 SPECT scans per million population per year, calculated on the basis of
current revascularisation and CA rates. Furthermore, it suggested that suitable
waiting times would be 6 weeks for routine scans and 1 week for urgent tests.
6.2 In order to achieve these levels of both adequacy of provision and speed of
accessibility, it is estimated that 73 additional gamma cameras would be needed
in England and Wales, at a capital cost of around £18 million. This is based on
providing 2,000 scans per annum per gamma camera, and a unit cost of
£250,000 per camera.
6.3 Because of the current lack of trained personnel, these levels of provision could
take some years to achieve, so the total cost to the NHS is likely to be phased
over several years. Once a steady state is achieved, based on the provision of
4,000 SPECT tests per million population per year, the estimated annual revenue
cost would be in the order of £27 million.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
7 Implementation and audit
7.1 NHS hospitals and all clinicians who care for people with CAD should review
current diagnostic options available to take account of the guidance set out in
section 1.
7.2 Local guidelines or care pathways for people with CAD should incorporate the
guidance.
7.3 To measure compliance locally with the guidance, the following criteria could be
used. Further details on suggestions for audit are presented in the section on
detail on criteria for audit.
7.3.1 MPS using SPECT is carried out for the diagnosis of individuals with suspected
CAD in the following circumstances.
• As the initial diagnostic tool for an individual with suspected CAD for whom
sECG poses problems of poor sensitivity or difficulties in interpretation, and
for an individual for whom treadmill exercise is difficult or impossible.
• As part of an investigational strategy for the diagnosis of suspected CAD in
an individual who has a lower likelihood of CAD and of future cardiac events.
7.3.2 MPS using SPECT is carried out as part of an investigational strategy in the
management of established CAD in an individual who remains symptomatic
following myocardial infarction or reperfusion interventions (CABG or PCI).
7.4 Local clinical audits on the care of patients with CAD could also include criteria
for the management of CAD based on the national standards, including standards
in the National Service Framework.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
8 Appraisal Committee members and
NICE project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committee is a standing advisory committee of NICE. Its members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. The Appraisal Committee meets 3 times a
month except in December, when there are no meetings. The Committee membership is
split into 3 branches, with the chair, vice-chair and a number of other members between
them attending meetings of all branches. Each branch considers its own list of
technologies and ongoing topics are not moved between the branches.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations interests, are posted on the NICE website.
Dr A E Ades
MRC Senior Scientist, MRC Health Services Research Collaboration, Department of Social
Medicine, University of Bristol
Professor Ron Akehurst
Dean, School of Health-Related Research, University of Sheffield
Dr Tom Aslan
General Practitioner, Stockwell, London
Professor David Barnett (Chair)
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Leicester
Dr Sheila Bird
MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Professor Rosamund Bryar
Professor of Community and Primary Care Nursing, St Bartholomew's School of Nursing
and Midwifery, London
Dr Karl Claxton
Health Economist, University of York
Professor Terry Feest
Clinical Director and Consultant Nephrologist, Richard Bright Renal Unit, Chair of UK Renal
Registry, Bristol
Professor Gary A Ford
Professor of Pharmacology of Old Age, Consultant Physician, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
Hospitals NHS Trust
Dr John Geddes
Consultant Psychiatrist, University Department of Psychiatrists, Oxford
Ms Bethan George
Interface Liaison Pharmacist, Tower Hamlets PCT and Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel
Dr Trevor Gibbs
Head, Global Clinical Safety and Pharmacovigilance, GlaxoSmithKline, Greenford
Mr John Goulston
Director of Finance, Barts and The London NHS Trust
Professor Philip Home
Professor of Diabetes Medicine, University of Newcastle-upon- Tyne
Dr Terry John
General Practitioner, The Firs, London
Mr Muntzer Mughal
Consultant Surgeon, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Chorley
Judith Paget
Chief Executive, Caerphilly Local Health Board, Torfaen

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Mrs Kathryn Roberts
Nurse Practitioner, Hyde, Cheshire
Ms Anne Smith
Lay Representative, Trustee, Long-Term Medical Conditions Alliance
Dr Cathryn Thomas
General Practitioner, Senior Lecturer, Department of Primary Care and General Practice,
University of Birmingham
Dr Norman Vetter Reader
Department of Epidemiology, Statistics and Public Health, College of Medicine, University
of Wales, Cardiff
Dr David Winfield
Consultant Haematologist, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield
NICE Project Team
Each appraisal of a technology is assigned to a health technology analyst and a project
manager.
Dr Elisabeth George and Dr Dogan Fidan
Technical Leads
Kathleen Dalby
Project Manager

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
9 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The following documentation and opinions were made available to the Committee:
The Assessment Report for this appraisal was prepared by the Health Services Research
Unit in collaboration with the Health Economics Research Unit, the Department of Public
Health, Institute of Applied Health Sciences, and the Cardiology Research Group,
University of Aberdeen, and the Department of Bio-Medical Physics and Bio-Engineering,
Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust.
Systematic review of the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness, and economic evaluation,
of myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction
Graham Mowatt, Luke Vale, Miriam Brazzelli, Rodolfo Hernandez, Alison Murray, Neil Scott,
Cynthia Fraser, Lynda McKenzie, Howard Gemmell, Graham Hillis, and Malcolm Metcalfe,
May 2003.
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal. They
were invited to make submissions and comment on the draft scope, assessment report
and the Appraisal Consultation Document (ACD). Consultee organisations are provided
with the opportunity to appeal against the Final Appraisal Determination.
Companies or sponsors:
• Amersham Health
• Ashby GB Ltd
• Bartec Medical Systems (UK) Ltd
• Bristol-Myers Squibb
• GE Medical Systems
• Philips Medical Systems

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
• Siemens
• Tyco Healthcare UK Ltd
Professional or specialist, and patient or carer groups:
• Action Heart
• Association of British Health-Care Industries
• British Cardiac Patients Association
• British Cardiac Society
• British Cardiovascular Interventional Society
• British Heart Foundation
• British Nuclear Cardiology Society
• British Nuclear Medicine Society
• Department of Health
• Fareham and Gosport Primary Care Trust
• Maidstone Weald Primary Care Trust
• Royal College of Physicians
• Royal College of Radiologists
• Society for Cardiological Science and Technology
• Welsh Assembly Government
Commentator organisations (without the right of appeal):
• Cochrane Heart Group
• Institute of Nuclear Medicine
• Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine
• NHS Confederation

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
• NHS Information Authority
• NHS Purchasing and Supply Agency
• NHS Quality Improvement Scotland
The following individuals were selected from clinical expert and patient advocate
nominations from the professional or specialist, and patient or carer groups. They
participated in the Appraisal Committee discussions and provided evidence to inform the
Appraisal Committee's deliberations. They gave their expert personal view on myocardial
perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and myocardial
infarction by attending the initial Committee discussion and/or providing written evidence
to the Committee. They were also invited to comment on the ACD.
• Dr Constantinos Anagnostopoulos, President, British Nuclear Cardiology Society and
Consultant and Honorary Senior Lecturer of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Nuclear
Medicine, Royal Brompton Hospital, London
• Professor SR Underwood, Professor of Cardiac Imaging, Royal Brompton Hospital,
London

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
10 Detail on criteria for audit of the use of
myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the
diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction
Possible objectives for an audit
An audit on MPS using SPECT could be carried out to ensure that the technique is used
appropriately.
Possible patients to be included in the audit
An audit could be carried out on people referred for investigation of coronary artery
disease (CAD) and people who have CAD and who remain symptomatic following
myocardial infarction, CABG or PCI, for a reasonable period for audit, for example, 3 or 6
months.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Measures that could be used as a basis for audit
Table 1 The measure that could be used in an audit of MPS using SPECT for people
referred for investigation of CAD
Criterion Standard Exception Definition of terms
1. MPS using SPECT
is carried out in the Clinicians will need to agree locally on how
following patients are identified as having suspected
circumstances: CAD, for audit purposes.
a. as the initial For 1a, people for whom there may be
diagnostic tool for an problems of sensitivity or interpretation
individual with include women, people with cardiac
suspected CAD for conduction defects (for example, left bundle
whom sECG poses branch block), and people with diabetes.
problems of poor 100% of Clinicians will need to agree locally on how a
sensitivity or people patient for whom treadmill exercise is
difficulties in who have difficult or impossible is identified, for audit
interpretation or for suspected None purposes.
whom treadmill CAD and
For 1b, clinicians will need to agree locally
exercise is difficult or who meet
on how the likelihood of CAD and the
impossible 1a or 1b
likelihood of future cardiac events is
b. as part of an determined to be low, for audit purposes.
investigational Risk factors include age, gender, ethnic
strategy for the group, family history, associated co-
diagnosis of morbidities, clinical presentation, physical
suspected CAD in an examination, and results from other
individual with a lower investigations (for example, blood
likelihood of CAD and cholesterol levels or a resting
of future cardiac electrocardiogram).
events

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Table 2 The measure that could be used in an audit of MPS using SPECT for people with
established CAD who remain symptomatic following myocardial infarction, CABG or PCI
Criterion Standard Exception Definition of terms
100% of people
1. MPS using SPECT is carried Clinicians will need to
with established
out as part of an investigational agree locally on the
CAD who remain
strategy for an individual with definition of
symptomatic
established CAD who remains None symptomatic for an
following
symptomatic following individual patient that is
myocardial
myocardial infarction, CABG or documented, for audit
infarction, CABG or
PCI purposes.
PCI
Calculation of compliance
Compliance (%) with each measure described in the table above is calculated as follows.
[Number of patients whose care is consistent with the criterion plus number of patients
who meet any exception listed] divided by [Number of patients to whom the measure
applies] × 100
Clinicians should review the findings of measurement, identify whether practice can be
improved, agree on a plan to achieve any desired improvement and repeat the
measurement of actual practice to confirm that the desired improvement is being
achieved.

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy for the diagnosis and management of angina and
myocardial infarction (TA73)
Update information
July 2011: This guidance has been partially updated by NICE's guideline on recent-onset
chest pain of suspected cardiac origin and NICE's guideline on stable angina.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6981-4
