=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "optical-coherence-tomography-to-guide-percutaneous-coronary-intervention-pdf-1899869986836421.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:45:21.868598",
  "file_size_bytes": 71144,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/optical-coherence-tomography-to-guide-percutaneous-coronary-intervention-pdf-1899869986836421.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Optical coherence tomography
to guide percutaneous coronary
intervention
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 23 February 2014
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg481
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 2 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 The evidence on the safety of optical coherence tomography (OCT) to guide
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) shows no major concerns. The
evidence on efficacy is limited in quantity and quality. Therefore, this procedure
should only be used with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent
and audit or research.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to undertake OCT to guide PCI should take the following
actions.
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their NHS trusts.
• Ensure that patients understand the uncertainty about the procedure's
efficacy and provide them with clear written information. In addition, the use
of NICE's information for the public is recommended.
• The National Institute for Cardiovascular Outcomes Research runs the UK
Central Cardiac Audit Database (UKCCAD) and clinicians should enter details
about all patients undergoing OCT to guide PCI onto this database and
review local clinical outcomes.
1.3 NICE encourages further research into OCT to guide PCI compared against PCI
with no intravascular imaging or PCI with intravascular ultrasound. Research
outcomes should include data on medium- and long-term clinical outcomes,
including the need for revascularisation.
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 3 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
2 Indications and current treatments
2.1 Optical coherence tomography (OCT) uses a catheter emitting near-infrared light
to produce high-resolution images of blood vessel walls. It may be used to assess
stenotic lesions in the coronary arteries and to image the result of stent
deployment during percutaneous coronary interventions.
2.2 Coronary angiography is used to image coronary arteries immediately before
angioplasty. Intravascular ultrasound or OCT may be used to provide additional
and complementary information to coronary angiography.
3 The procedure
3.1 Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is usually performed using local
anaesthesia. A guide wire and delivery sheath are introduced percutaneously into
either the femoral or radial artery and passed into the target coronary artery
using fluoroscopic image guidance. OCT imaging needs a blood-free field. This
was first achieved by an occlusive technique, using an occlusion balloon with
first-generation, time-domain OCT (TD OCT), but this technique is no longer used
in clinical practice. A non-occlusive technique is now used, involving continuous
flushing of contrast with frequency-domain OCT (FD OCT). For non-occlusive
OCT, a guide wire through which contrast can be injected is used. The imaging
catheter is delivered over this wire. Injection of contrast and imaging take place
concurrently.
3.2 Second-generation FD OCT devices aim to improve image quality and, more
importantly, increase the speed of image acquisition by a factor of 10. FD OCT
has superseded TD OCT in the UK.
3.3 The resolution of coronary OCT is reported to be 10 times higher than that of
intravascular ultrasound, and has rapid 3-dimensional reconstruction capability.
The aim of providing more detailed images is to improve clinical outcome.
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 4 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
4 Efficacy
This section describes efficacy outcomes from the published literature that the Committee
considered as part of the evidence about this procedure. For more detailed information on
the evidence, see the overview.
4.1 A retrospective case series compared 335 matched pairs of patients undergoing
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with either angiographic guidance
alone or a combination of angiographic and frequency-domain optical coherence
tomography (FD OCT) guidance. Cardiac death or myocardial infarction (MI) were
less frequent in patients treated by PCI with a combination of angiographic and
FD OCT guidance than in those treated by PCI with angiographic guidance alone
over a follow-up period of 1 year. There were 15 cardiac deaths and 29 MIs in the
angiography-only group, and 4 cardiac deaths and 18 MIs in the combined
angiography and FD-OCT group; odds ratio 0.49; 95% confidence interval 0.25 to
0.96, p=0.037.
4.2 A randomised controlled trial comparing FD OCT against intravascular ultrasound
for PCI optimisation in 70 patients reported that there was inferior stent
expansion, both focal (65% versus 80%, p=0.002) and diffuse (84% versus 99%,
p=0.003), when FD OCT had been used for guidance. PCI guided by FD OCT also
showed a significant increase in residual stent-edge plaque burden (51% versus
42%, p<0.001). There were no significant differences in stent apposition.
4.3 In the retrospective case series comparing 335 matched pairs of patients
undergoing PCI with either angiographic guidance or a combination of
angiographic and FD OCT guidance, FD OCT led to additional interventions
(further stenting and additional balloon dilation) in 116 patients (35%).
4.4 In a case series of 40 patients in whom OCT was performed to evaluate
ambiguous or intermediate lesions, 60% (24 out of 40) were treated by PCI and
40% (16 out of 40) had PCI deferred. None of the patients for whom PCI was
deferred had a coronary event within an average follow-up of 4.6 months.
4.5 The specialist advisers listed a key efficacy outcome as a change in diagnosis or
management due to OCT imaging results. They cited as examples identifying
culprit or non-culprit plaques in acute coronary syndromes, identifying
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 5 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
intracoronary or intra-stent thrombus, identifying dissections and complications
after stenting, examining stent deformation and conformation, identifying modes
of stent failure including neoatherogenesis, and documenting stent tissue
coverage.
5 Safety
This section describes safety outcomes from the published literature that the Committee
considered as part of the evidence about this procedure. For more detailed information on
the evidence, see the overview.
5.1 A large coronary perforation occurred (no further details of cause available)
during optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging in 1 patient presented in a
case report, leading to reduced blood pressure and loss of consciousness.
Surgical repair was done but the patient died of cardiac arrest after 7 days.
5.2 A minor type A coronary dissection occurred in 1 patient in the case series of 468
patients during time-domain OCT (TD OCT) imaging. Coronary blood flow was
not impaired and further treatment was not needed.
5.3 Ventricular fibrillation occurred in 5 patients in a case series of 468 patients
during TD OCT imaging, in 3 out of 256 during occlusive imaging and 2 out of 212
during non-occlusive imaging. In all cases, sinus rhythm was promptly restored
after stopping OCT imaging and external defibrillation. Ventricular ectopic beats
were noted in 3 patients in a case series of 90 patients undergoing 114 OCT
image acquisitions.
5.4 Air embolism occurred in 3 patients in the case series of 468 patients during TD
OCT imaging. All responded promptly to air aspiration, treatment with nitrates
and, in 1 patient, nitroprusside administration.
5.5 Mechanical device failure occurred in 1 patient in the case series of 468 patients.
The imaging wire became trapped within the struts of a stent and the tip
fractured and remained within the stent. At 4-month follow-up there had been no
clinical consequences and angiography showed no flow abnormalities.
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 6 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
5.6 Multiple thrombi were reported during OCT imaging in 3 patients presented in
case reports. These formed during OCT imaging in the left anterior descending
artery causing total occlusion in 1 patient and subtotal occlusion in 2 others. All
resolved with appropriate management and all patients recovered uneventfully.
5.7 Vessel spasm during withdrawal of the OCT wire was reported in a single case
report. This caused chest pain and ST elevation but resolved with an
intracoronary injection of nitrate.
5.8 Self-limiting chest pain was reported by 48% of patients (225 out of 468) during
TD OCT imaging in the case series of 468 patients. This was significantly more
common when the occlusive rather than the non-occlusive technique was used
(70% [180 out of 256] versus 21% [45 out of 212], p<0.001).
5.9 Self-limiting QRS widening or ST depression and ST elevation occurred in 192
(46%) of 468 patients treated by occlusive or non-occlusive TD OCT. These were
significantly more common when the occlusive rather than the non-occlusive
technique was used (61% [139 out of 256] versus 27% [53 out of 212], p<0.001).
5.10 The specialist advisers described the possibility that emergency revascularisation
might be needed as a result of some of the complications of OCT which were
reported in the literature.
6 Committee comments
6.1 The Committee was aware of the large numbers of patients in whom optical
coherence tomography during percutaneous coronary interventions might be
used. It considered that a high degree of certainty about the clinical utility of the
procedure was therefore necessary, and this underpinned the recommendation in
section 1.1.
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
--- Страница 7 ---
Optical coherence tomography to guide percutaneous coronary intervention (IPG481)
7 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-0442-6
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2026. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 7
