Percutaneous deep venous arterialisation for chronic limb-threatening ischaemia
1 Recommendations
1.1 Percutaneous deep venous arterialisation for chronic limb-threatening
ischaemia in people with limited treatment options should only be used
with special arrangements for clinical governance, consent, and audit or
research. Find out what special arrangements mean on the NICE
interventional procedures guidance page.
1.2 Clinicians wanting to do percutaneous deep venous arterialisation for
chronic limb-threatening ischaemia should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their healthcare organisation.
• Ensure that people (and their families and carers as appropriate) understand
the procedure's safety and efficacy, and any uncertainties about these.
• Take account of NICE's advice on shared decision making, including NICE's
information for the public.
• Audit and review clinical outcomes of everyone having the procedure. The main
efficacy and safety outcomes identified in this guidance can be entered into
NICE's interventional procedure outcomes audit tool (for use at local
discretion).
• Discuss the outcomes of the procedure during their annual appraisal to reflect,
learn and improve.
1.3 Healthcare organisations should:
• Ensure systems are in place that support clinicians to collect and report data

 
on outcomes and safety for everyone having this procedure.
• Regularly review data on outcomes and safety for this procedure.
1.4 Further research should report:
• details of patient selection (including number of patients dependent on
dialysis)
• details of the procedure technique
• duration of anticoagulation
• patient outcomes (including planned and unplanned reintervention rate, major
amputation rate, and quality of life).
Why the committee made these recommendations
The evidence is limited in quality and quantity; in particular, long-term data and quality of
life data are lacking. The evidence includes different procedure techniques and different
ways of selecting patients who have no other options for arterial revascularisation
(restoring blood flow to a body part in which the blood vessels have become blocked). So,
in people who have limited treatment options, this procedure can be used with special
arrangements.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Chronic limb-threatening ischaemia of the lower extremities is caused by
severely narrowed or blocked arteries. It is an advanced stage of
peripheral arterial disease. The severely reduced blood supply causes
ischaemic pain, ulceration, tissue loss and gangrene. It is associated with
high amputation and mortality rates, and poor quality of life.

 
Current treatments
2.2 Chronic limb-threatening ischaemia usually needs treatment to re-
establish blood flow to the affected area and to prevent major
amputation. Treatment options include medications, endovascular
interventions (such as angioplasty, stents and directional atherectomy)
and surgical treatments (such as bypass). Management of chronic limb-
threatening ischaemia is described in NICE's clinical guideline on
peripheral arterial disease.
The procedure
2.3 The procedure uses an endovascular, minimally invasive approach. An
arteriovenous fistula is created to allow venous arterialisation in the
below-the-knee vasculature. The aim is to restore blood flow to the
ischaemic foot.
2.4 Preoperative investigation is needed to confirm adequate pedal venous
anatomy and identify a suitable crossover point between the vessels.
2.5 The procedure is usually done using general anaesthesia, and with
ultrasound guidance. Antegrade arterial access is established through
the common femoral artery, and retrograde venous access is established
through the tibial vein. Arterial and venous catheters are inserted and
advanced to the target artery and vein (most frequently the posterior
tibial artery and vein). Once both catheters are positioned with a
crossover point, a needle is used to create an arteriovenous fistula.
Valvulotomy of the vein is then done, usually from the crossover point to
the midfoot. Multiple stents are placed in the vein from the level of the
calcaneus to the arteriovenous crossover point, and a crossing stent is
inserted to maintain the arteriovenous fistula. This establishes retrograde
blood flow down the veins, which become arterialised.
2.6 Arteriography is done at the end of the procedure to visualise blood flow
into the deep venous arch.

 
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and
safety of this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature
search and detailed review of the evidence from 7 sources, which was
discussed by the committee. The evidence included 1 single-arm pivotal
study, 2 single-arm pilot studies, and 4 case series. It is presented in the
summary of key evidence section in the interventional procedures
overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of the overview.
Additional documentation in confidence provided by a company was also
considered by the committee.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: improvement in limb perfusion and wound healing,
reduction in major amputation, and improvement in quality of life.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: pain, bleeding, infection, worsening of perfusion, and
steal syndrome.
3.4 Three commentaries from people who have had this procedure were
discussed by the committee.
Committee comments
3.5 Some patients needed both planned and unplanned reinterventions. The
reinterventions might not have been related to this procedure.
3.6 The committee was informed that patient selection and postprocedural
surveillance are important, and that patients should be followed up for
life.
3.7 The committee was informed that this is a challenging procedure, and
that it should only be done by clinicians with specific training and
experience in this technique.

 
3.8 There are different techniques and devices used, which might have
different efficacy and safety profiles. The committee was informed that
there is currently only 1 device with regulatory approval for use in the UK.
3.9 The committee encourages data entry into a registry that captures the
technique used.