=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "percutaneous-insertion-of-a-cerebral-protection-device-to-prevent-cerebral-embolism-during-tavi-pdf-1899874157322949.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:48.210315",
  "file_size_bytes": 63078,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/percutaneous-insertion-of-a-cerebral-protection-device-to-prevent-cerebral-embolism-during-tavi-pdf-1899874157322949.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Percutaneous insertion of a
cerebral protection device to
prevent cerebral embolism
during TAVI
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 12 June 2019
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg650
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.

Percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device to prevent cerebral embolism
during TAVI (IPG650)
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 The evidence on percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device
to prevent cerebral embolism during transcatheter aortic valve
implantation (TAVI) raises no major safety concerns other than those
associated with the TAVI procedure. However, the evidence on efficacy
for preventing TAVI-related stroke is inconclusive. Therefore, this
procedure should only be used with special arrangements for clinical
governance, consent, and audit or research. Find out what special
arrangements mean on the NICE interventional procedures guidance
page.
1.2 Clinicians wishing to do percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection
device to prevent cerebral embolism during TAVI should:
• Inform the clinical governance leads in their NHS trusts.
• Ensure that patients and their carers understand the procedure's safety and
efficacy, as well as any uncertainties about these. Provide them with clear
written information to support shared decision making. In addition, the use of
NICE's information for the public is recommended.
• Details of all patients should be entered into the UK TAVI registry.
1.3 Patient selection for this procedure should be done by the
multidisciplinary team that is considering the suitability of TAVI.
1.4 This procedure should only be done in specialised centres, and only by

Percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device to prevent cerebral embolism
during TAVI (IPG650)
clinicians and teams with specific training and experience in complex
endovascular interventions. Centres doing this procedure should have
both cardiac and vascular surgical support for the emergency treatment
of complications and subsequent patient care.
1.5 NICE encourages further research on percutaneous insertion of a
cerebral protection device to prevent cerebral embolism during TAVI.
This should include details of patient selection and risk stratification for
TAVI-related stroke. NICE may update the guidance on publication of
further evidence.
2 The condition and procedure
The condition
2.1 Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) aims to provide a less
invasive alternative to open cardiac surgery for treating aortic stenosis,
avoiding the need for sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. However,
debris may be dislodged during the TAVI procedure. This can enter the
cerebral circulation and embolise, causing cerebral ischaemic events
including a stroke.
The procedure
2.2 Percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device aims to prevent
debris dislodged during TAVI from passing into the cerebral circulation.
The aim is to reduce the risk of cerebral ischaemic events including a
stroke.
2.3 During the TAVI procedure, before the valve is inserted, a cerebral
protection device is inserted percutaneously through the radial or
femoral artery. Depending on the type of device used, it is placed into
the aortic arch or into the brachiocephalic (innominate) and left common
carotid arteries. It is deployed to protect the ostia of the brachiocephalic
(innominate) artery and the left common carotid artery. It may also
protect the left subclavian artery, depending on the type of device used.

Percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device to prevent cerebral embolism
during TAVI (IPG650)
It works either by filtering dislodged debris from the blood, or by
deflecting dislodged debris away from the cerebral circulation to the
systemic circulation. The device is removed at the end of the TAVI
procedure.
2.4 The evidence review identified 3 types of cerebral protection devices.
One is a deflector system that covers all 3 main branches of the aortic
arch. The 2 other types cover the brachiocephalic trunk and the left
common carotid artery; 1 is a filter system, the other is a deflector
system.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 9 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 2 systematic reviews and meta-analyses, 4 randomised
controlled trials, 1 non-randomised comparative study, 1 patient-level
pooled analysis and 1 case series, and is presented in table 2 of the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the
appendix of the overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcome to be: reduction in TAVI-related embolic strokes.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: vascular damage and bleeding.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.5 There are different types of devices available to prevent cerebral

Percutaneous insertion of a cerebral protection device to prevent cerebral embolism
during TAVI (IPG650)
embolism during TAVI, and they work in different ways. The committee
noted that most of the evidence it reviewed came from 1 type of device,
and that the technology is evolving.
3.6 Embolic stroke following TAVI is rare, but when it happens it can be
devastating. The studies reviewed by the committee had limited
statistical power to evaluate rare outcomes.
3.7 Using a cerebral protection device does not eliminate the risk of embolic
stroke following TAVI.
3.8 Detecting cerebral lesions resulting from incomplete protection is
challenging and the methods for doing it may have differed between the
studies.
3.9 The valves used for the TAVI procedure differ, but cerebral protection
benefit during TAVI has been demonstrated across all valve types.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3428-7
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
