=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "radiofrequency-ablation-of-varicose-veins-pdf-1465955362501.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:48:18.931605",
  "file_size_bytes": 57941,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/radiofrequency-ablation-of-varicose-veins-pdf-1465955362501.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Radiofrequency ablation of
varicose veins
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 24 September 2003
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg8
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with

Radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins (IPG8)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of radiofrequency ablation of
varicose veins appears adequate to support the use of this procedure as an
alternative to saphenofemoral ligation and stripping, provided that the normal
arrangements are in place for consent, audit and clinical governance.
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Symptomatic venous insufficiency is common. Saphenous vein insufficiency is
the most common form of venous insufficiency in those presenting with
symptoms, which include pain, leg fatigue, oedema, skin changes and venous
ulcers.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins involves heating the wall of the vein
using a bipolar generator and catheters with sheathable electrodes.
2.2.2 The long saphenous vein is accessed above or below the knee, either
percutaneously via an intravenous cannula/venepuncture sheath or via a small
incision. The catheter is manually withdrawn at 2.5 to 3 cm/minute, and the vein
wall temperature is maintained at 85°C.

Radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins (IPG8)
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 Evidence indicated that radiofrequency treatment resulted in immediate
occlusion of 90% to 100% of long saphenous veins. In one study, patients who
received radiofrequency ablation had less pain and required less analgesia
compared with those who had standard surgery (stripping).
2.3.2 In general, the evidence showed that fewer than 5% of patients continued to have
symptoms, such as leg pain, leg fatigue, oedema and noticeable varicose veins,
after the procedure. There were high patient satisfaction rates. For more details,
see the overview.
2.3.3 The Specialist Advisors reported that the long-term results of this procedure
were unknown, though in the short-term it seemed efficacious.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 One study showed similar postoperative complication rates of approximately 50%
in the radiofrequency ablation and stripping arms, including minor complications.
Other studies showed that skin burns occurred in 2% to 7% of patients who had
radiofrequency ablation. Paraesthesiae occurred in 0% to 15% of patients, and
were more common in patients whose treatment was below the knee. Clinical
phlebitis occurred in 2% to 3% of patients, deep vein thrombosis occurred in 1%
and pulmonary embolism was uncommon, occurring in fewer than 1%. For more
details, see the overview.
2.4.2 The Specialist Advisors reported similar complications to those above.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 The Committee noted that there were no long-term follow-up data; treated veins
may undergo late re-canalisation.

Radiofrequency ablation of varicose veins (IPG8)
3 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6170-2
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
