=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "rivaroxaban-for-preventing-adverse-outcomes-after-acute-management-of-acute-coronary-syndrome-pdf-82602549055429.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:50.517394",
  "file_size_bytes": 193614,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/rivaroxaban-for-preventing-adverse-outcomes-after-acute-management-of-acute-coronary-syndrome-pdf-82602549055429.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

Rivaroxaban for preventing
adverse outcomes after
acute management of acute
coronary syndrome
Technology appraisal guidance
Published: 25 March 2015
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta335

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
This guidance replaces ESNM27.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Rivaroxaban is recommended as an option within its marketing authorisation, in
combination with aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone, for preventing
atherothrombotic events in people who have had an acute coronary syndrome
with elevated cardiac biomarkers.
1.2 Clinicians should carefully assess the person's risk of bleeding before treatment
with rivaroxaban is started. The decision to start treatment should be made after
an informed discussion between the clinician and the patient about the benefits
and risks of rivaroxaban in combination with aspirin plus clopidogrel or with
aspirin alone, compared with aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone.
1.3 A decision on continuation of treatment should be taken no later than 12 months
after starting treatment. Clinicians should regularly reassess the relative benefits
and risks of continuing treatment with rivaroxaban and discuss them with the
patient.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
2 The technology
2.1 Rivaroxaban (Xarelto, Bayer), co-administered with aspirin alone or with aspirin
plus clopidogrel or ticlopidine, is indicated for the prevention of atherothrombotic
events in adult patients after an acute coronary syndrome with elevated cardiac
biomarkers. The licensed dose is 2.5 mg twice daily. Patients should also take a
daily dose of 75 to 100 mg aspirin or a daily dose of 75 to 100 mg aspirin in
addition to either a daily dose of 75 mg clopidogrel or a standard daily dose of
ticlopidine. Ticlopidine is not listed in the BNF.
2.2 Treatment with rivaroxaban should be evaluated regularly in the individual
patient, weighing the risk for ischaemic events against the bleeding risks.
Extension of treatment beyond 12 months should be done on an individual patient
basis because experience up to 24 months is limited. Treatment with rivaroxaban
should be started as soon as possible after stabilisation of the acute coronary
syndrome event (including revascularisation procedures); at the earliest 24 hours
after admission to hospital and at the time when parenteral anticoagulation
therapy would normally be discontinued.
2.3 The summary of product characteristics includes the following adverse reactions
for rivaroxaban: anaemia, dizziness, headache, fainting, bleeding events,
tachycardia (rapid heartbeat), low blood pressure, haematoma, stomach pain,
dyspepsia (heartburn), nausea, constipation, diarrhoea, vomiting, pruritus
(itching), rash, bruising, pain in the extremities, fever, and swelling, especially of
the ankles and feet. For full details of adverse reactions and contraindications,
see the summary of product characteristics.
2.4 The list price of rivaroxaban is £58.88 per 2.5 mg, 56 capsule pack (excluding
VAT, company submission) The recommended dose is 2.5 mg twice daily which
equates to a price of £2.10 per day. Total acquisition costs depend on the
duration of therapy. Assuming a treatment duration of 12 months, total acquisition
costs are £766.50. Costs may vary in different settings because of negotiated
procurement discounts.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
3 The company's submission
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by the company that
manufactures rivaroxaban and a review of this submission by the Evidence Review Group
(ERG).
3.1 The main evidence in the company's submission came from
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51. This was an international, multicentre (766 sites in
44 countries including the UK), randomised controlled trial (RCT) designed to
evaluate whether rivaroxaban in addition to standard-care antiplatelet therapy
reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction or stroke in
patients with recent acute coronary syndrome (unstable angina, non-ST segment
elevation myocardial infarction [NSTEMI] or ST segment elevation myocardial
infarction [STEMI]). The company also provided supportive evidence from the
ATLAS-ACS TIMI 46 trial, which compared rivaroxaban once-daily dosing with
twice-daily dosing within the same total daily dose range (5 to 20 mg). This study
was a safety and efficacy study to determine the most favourable dose and
dosing regimen of rivaroxaban for ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51.
3.2 The ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial had 3 phases: a 6-day screening phase; a
double-blind treatment phase; and a follow-up phase. Patients were enrolled into
the trial within 7 days of being admitted to hospital for acute coronary syndrome.
After stabilisation of the acute coronary syndrome (and after completion of any
initial management strategies such as revascularisation), patients were stratified
on the basis of whether they were to have clopidogrel or ticlopidine in addition to
aspirin as standard care (stratum 1: aspirin only [n=1,053]; stratum 2: aspirin plus
clopidogrel or ticlopidine [n=14,473]). Patients were then randomised to 1 of
3 treatment groups; rivaroxaban 2.5 mg, rivaroxaban 5 mg or placebo (all taken
twice daily). The dosage of clopidogrel or ticlopidine followed national or local
prescribing information. Enrolment was neither capped nor fixed and depended
on regional medical practice. The daily maintenance dose was not to exceed
75 mg a day for clopidogrel or 250 mg twice daily for ticlopidine. Approximately
99% of the patients in stratum 2 had clopidogrel. The duration of treatment was
not fixed because the trial was event-driven (that is, the time needed to obtain at
least 983 primary efficacy end-point events across both strata and at least
728 primary efficacy events in stratum 2). The mean duration of treatment was

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
13.1 months.
3.3 The company considered the baseline patient characteristics of those enrolled
into ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 to be generally similar between the treatment groups.
The mean age of the trial population was 61.8 years; 9.0% were aged over
75 years, and 74.7% were men. In the trial population, the index acute coronary
syndrome event was 50.9% STEMI, 25.6% NSTEMI and 23.6% unstable angina.
The company stated that baseline patient characteristics were representative of
a moderate to high-risk population of patients with acute coronary syndrome,
with the majority of all patients randomised having cardiovascular risk factors
such as hypertension (67.4%), diabetes (32.0%), a history of myocardial infarction
(26.9%) or hypercholesterolaemia (48.6%). Of the 60.5% of patients who had a
revascularisation procedure for the index event; the vast majority of these were
percutaneous coronary intervention. In the trial population 7.1% of patients had
impaired renal function with creatinine clearance less than 50 ml/min.
3.4 The efficacy analysis was based on the modified intention-to-treat (mITT)
analysis set, which included all randomised patients (except those from
3 excluded sites where trial misconduct was identified) and the end point events
that occurred from randomisation up to the earlier date of the global treatment
end date, or 30 days after last dose of study drug (for patients who discontinued
the study drug prematurely), or 30 days after randomisation (for patients who
were randomised but never treated). The exclusion of the data from the 3 sites
was considered to be acceptable by the European Medicines Agency (EMA). The
company presented the efficacy results for the 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice-daily
and 5 mg twice-daily doses separately and combined by strata (stratum 1,
stratum 2 and combined [ALL strata]).
3.5 The primary efficacy end point in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 was the composite of
death from cardiovascular causes (cardiovascular [CV] death), myocardial
infarction (MI) or stroke (ischaemic, haemorrhagic or stroke of uncertain cause). A
range of secondary composite end points were also included. These were:
• composite of death from any cause, MI or stroke
• net clinical outcome (composite of CV death, MI, ischaemic stroke and
non-CABG TIMI major bleeding [major bleeding assessed using 'Thrombolysis
in Myocardial Infarction' criteria not related to coronary-artery bypass

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
grafting])
• composite of CV death, MI, stroke or severe recurrent ischaemia needing
revascularisation
• composite of CV death, MI, stroke or severe recurrent ischaemia leading to
hospitalisation.
3.6 The results for the primary efficacy end point for the total trial population in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 are provided in table 1.
Table 1 Effect of rivaroxaban compared with placebo on the primary efficacy end point
(total population, mITT analysis [excluding 3 sites])
2.5 mg rivaroxaban bd 5 mg rivaroxaban bd Combined rivaroxaban
Stratum
versus placebo versus placebo dose versus placebo
HR 0.84 HR 0.85
HR 0.84
ALL strata 95% CI 0.72 to 95% CI 0.73 to
95% CI 0.74 to 0.96
(n=15,342) 0.97 0.98
p=0.008
p=0.02 p=0.028
HR 0.74 HR 0.64
HR 0.69
Stratum 1: aspirin alone 95% CI 0.45 to 95% CI 0.38 to
95% CI 0.45 to 1.05
(n=1,050) 1.22 1.07
p=0.084
p=0.234 p=0.089
HR 0.85 HR 0.87
Stratum 2: aspirin plus HR 0.86
95% CI 0.72 to 95% CI 0.74 to
clopidogrel or ticlopidine 95% CI 0.75 to 0.98
0.99 1.01
(n=14,292) p=0.024
p=0.039 p=0.075
Abbreviations: bd, twice daily; CI: confidence interval; HR: hazard ratio, mITT, modified
intention to treat
3.7 In its submission, the company provided results on the primary efficacy end point
across a number of subgroups for the whole trial population only (combined
2.5 mg twice daily and 5 mg twice daily doses of rivaroxaban). These included
age, sex, creatinine clearance, previous MI, stroke or transient ischaemic attack

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
(TIA) and index event (STEMI, NSTEMI or unstable angina). The company stated
that in general, rivaroxaban treatment was consistently associated with improved
outcomes across all major subgroups (with the exception of the subgroup
analysis of prior history of stroke or TIA [eligible to be enrolled in stratum 1 only]).
The company stated that during the marketing authorisation process, the EMA
requested that a narrower population of patients with acute coronary syndrome
be identified with a more favourable benefit–risk balance obtained from treatment
with rivaroxaban in addition to dual antiplatelet therapy. The population identified
by the company, and accepted by the EMA, was patients who had acute coronary
syndrome with elevated cardiac biomarkers (that is patients with STEMI and
NSTEMI), excluding patients with a history of stroke or TIA.
3.8 The company presented a post hoc subgroup analysis of patients in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 who had acute coronary syndrome with elevated cardiac
biomarkers, excluding those with a history of stroke and TIA. The company
referred to this subgroup as the licensed population because it is the population
of patients for whom the drug is indicated in the marketing authorisation. It
consisted of 12,353 patients in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 (ALL strata, 80% of the
total trial population). Results for the primary efficacy end point and components
for the licensed population in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 are provided in table 2.
Table 2 presents only the results for ALL strata because the results for strata 1
(aspirin alone) and strata 2 (aspirin plus clopidogrel or ticlopidine) are considered
to be confidential by the company and so cannot be reported. The company
explained that its submission focused on the results for the 2.5 mg twice-daily
dose because this is the licensed dose.
Table 2 Effect of rivaroxaban compared with placebo on the primary efficacy end point
and components (licensed population, mITT analysis [excluding 3 sites]) for all strata
(n=12,353)
2.5 mg Rivaroxaban bd versus 5 mg Rivaroxaban bd versus Combined rivaroxaban dose versus
All strata n=12,353
placebo placebo placebo
HR 0.80 HR 0.79 HR 0.79
Primary end
95% CI 0.68 to 0.94 95% CI 0.67 to 0.93 95% CI 0.69 to 0.91
point
p=0.007 p=0.004 p=0.001
HR 0.55 HR 0.89 HR 0.72
CV death 95% CI 0.41 to 0.74 95% CI 0.69 to 1.15 95% CI 0.57 to 0.90
p<0.001 p=0.360 p=0.004

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
2.5 mg Rivaroxaban bd versus 5 mg Rivaroxaban bd versus Combined rivaroxaban dose versus
All strata n=12,353
placebo placebo placebo
HR 0.88 HR 0.75 HR 0.81
MI 95% CI 0.72 to 1.08 95% CI 0.61 to 0.92 95% CI 0.68 to 0.97
p=0.215 p=0.007 p=0.021
HR 1.23 HR 1.38 HR 1.30
Stroke 95% CI 0.75 to 2.02 95% CI 0.85 to 2.24 95% CI 0.85 to 2.01
p=0.403 p=0.190 p=0.225
Abbreviations: bd, twice daily; CI, confidence interval; CV, cardiovascular; HR, hazard ratio;
MI, myocardial infarction; mITT, modified intention to treat
3.9 The company did not report any results in relation to treatment compliance or
premature discontinuation of study treatments for the licensed population
because data were not available at the time of submission. For the total trial
population, among patients who had at least 1 dose of a study drug, premature
discontinuation of treatment occurred in 26.9% (1,376 out of 5,115) of patients
having the 2.5 mg twice-daily dose of rivaroxaban, 29.4% (1,504 out of 5,110) of
patients having the 5 mg twice-daily dose of rivaroxaban and 26.4% (1,351 out of
5,125) of patients having placebo. No statistical comparisons were reported for
these differences. The most common reasons for discontinuation of study
treatment were adverse events (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily 8.8%; rivaroxaban
5 mg twice daily 10.9%; placebo 7.3%), consent withdrawal (rivaroxaban 2.5 mg
twice daily 4.7%; rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily 4.3%; placebo 4.3%) and 'other'
(rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily 11.5%; rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily 11.3%;
placebo 11.8%).
3.10 Of the 15,526 patients randomised to ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, 13,124 (84.5%)
patients were alive at the end of the trial follow-up period and 537 patients
(3.5%) had died. The remaining 1865 (12.0%) of patients were categorised as
having 'incomplete follow-up'. 11,026 (71.0%) of randomised patients completed
both the double-blind treatment period and the follow-up period. At the end of
the trial, of the 1,294 patients who withdrew consent, vital status was unknown
for 1117 (86.3%) patients. During discussions with the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), concerns were raised about the level of missing data as a
result of the incomplete follow up of patients who withdrew from the trial. The

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
company therefore made extensive efforts to obtain vital status information on
patients who withdrew consent. This reduced the proportion of patients with
unknown vital status to 3.2% (495 patients) in the intention to treat (ITT) analysis
set and 1.8% (278 patients) in the mITT analysis set.
3.11 Health-related quality of life was assessed in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 using the
EuroQoL (EQ-5D) utility index. EQ-5D data were collected from sites in
8 countries including the UK at baseline, 4 weeks, 24 weeks, 48 weeks, 72 weeks
and 96 weeks. Health-related quality of life data were collected for all of the
participants in the trial. The company stated that the utility values obtained from
the trial were not used in the economic model.
3.12 The primary safety analysis set was the treatment-emergent safety analysis set,
which included all patients who were randomised and who had at least 1 dose of
the study drug. For each patient, all events were included from the first dose of
the study drug up to the date of the last dose of study drug plus 2 days. This
analysis set was used for the primary safety end point of non-CABG TIMI major
bleeding events, key adverse event summaries and for the benefit–risk analysis.
3.13 The company presented results on the primary safety end point and other
bleeding-related end points based on the whole trial population and for the
licensed population (that is, adult patients after an acute coronary syndrome with
elevated cardiac biomarkers without a history of stroke or TIA). The total number
of patients included in the safety analysis from ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 in the
licensed population was 12,325 (ALL strata n=4,096; rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice
daily n=4,072; rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily n=4,157; placebo). The results for the
licensed population showed a dose-dependent increase in the rate of non-CABG
TIMI major bleeding events for rivaroxaban added to antiplatelet therapy
compared with antiplatelet therapy alone. In 'ALL strata' in the
treatment-emergent safety analysis set, the primary safety end point occurred in
1.3% of patients in the rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice-daily group, 1.6% of patients in
the rivaroxaban 5 mg twice-daily group and 0.4% of patients in the placebo
group. The hazard ratio (HR) for the primary safety end point was 3.44 (95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.97, 6.01) for the 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice-daily group,
4.4 (95% CI 2.55 to 7.60) for the rivaroxaban 5 mg twice-daily group and 3.91
(95% CI 2.32 to 6.59) for the rivaroxaban combined-dose group.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
Cost effectiveness
3.14 The company submitted a de novo Markov cohort model comparing rivaroxaban
2.5 mg twice daily with standard care (clopidogrel plus aspirin or aspirin alone) in
adults who had a recent acute coronary syndrome with elevated cardiac
biomarkers and who had not had a previous stroke or TIA. The model used a time
horizon of 40 years that was divided into 2 periods: an observation period, which
was intended to replicate the duration of the trial data, and an extrapolation
period. The extrapolation period started after 96 weeks and had a cycle length of
6 months. In the observation period the initial 2 cycles had a cycle length of
4 weeks and 8 weeks respectively and the remaining cycles used a cycle length
of 12 weeks. The company based the analysis from an NHS and personal social
services perspective, and costs and benefits were discounted at an annual rate
of 3.5%. Half-cycle correction was performed on the Markov trace.
3.15 The company's model consisted of a number of health states corresponding to
whether or not the hypothetical patient had another acute coronary syndrome
event. The acute coronary syndrome events considered in the model were: MI,
ischaemic stroke, haemorrhagic stroke or intracranial haemorrhage (HS/ICH); a
bleeding event measured on the TIMI scale; and revascularisation. These acute
coronary syndrome events fell into 2 broad categories: those with longer term
implications for the relative risks of developing further conditions, utility and
costs and those deemed to be transient events where the impacts were limited to
1 model cycle. Patients could die at any time in the model and there were multiple
causes of death simulated in the model. Patients could die from an MI, ischaemic
stroke or HS/ICH or other CV death, which included deaths related to bleeding.
Patients could also die from non-CV causes at any time point in the model.
3.16 The long-term acute coronary syndrome events included the MI, ischaemic stroke
and HS/ICH conditions. The long-term events had 2 subsequent tunnel states to
allow for the patient's health-related quality of life to improve over time, and for
the cost of treatment and the relative risk of having a subsequent event to fall
over time. Patients could have up to 3 acute coronary syndrome events; the
specific types of event were recorded when patients had 2 or fewer events.
When 3 events happened, it was assumed that there was 1 event of each type
(that is an MI, an ischaemic stroke and a HS/ICH).

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
3.17 The health states corresponding to bleeding and revascularisations were
assumed to be transient health states and when a patient entered these states a
one-off cost and utility decrement was applied. These transient health states
were applied to only the patients in the observation period of the model, implicitly
assuming that the bleeding and revascularisation rates for the 2 interventions
were comparable after rivaroxaban treatment was discontinued for all patients at
the end of the second year.
3.18 The population modelled was the subgroup of patients who had acute coronary
syndrome with elevated cardiac biomarkers and had not experienced a prior
stroke or TIA in the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial. The data were not pooled from
both rivaroxaban trial arms; the model was based on the subgroup data from
patients who had 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice daily only. Data from both trial strata
were used to inform the model. In accordance with ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, it was
assumed that in the base case 93% of patients had clopidogrel plus aspirin and
7% of patients had aspirin alone. A scenario analysis was presented considering
only those patients who had clopidogrel and aspirin.
3.19 In the base case the transition probabilities for future acute coronary
syndrome-related events in the observation period (2 years) were determined by
fitting a Weibull distribution to the trial data. This was undertaken for both the
rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice-daily arm and for the placebo arm. The company stated
that because patient numbers diminished over time, particularly visible towards
the end of ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, it was difficult to estimate transition
probabilities directly from the data for the later cycles within the observation
period. The company commented that by fitting a Weibull distribution to the
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial data, it was able to remove the data fluctuations
caused by a decline in the numbers of observations over the trial.
3.20 The company's model assumed that patients could discontinue treatment in the
observation period after they had an acute coronary syndrome event. The
probability of discontinuation following an event was obtained from
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51. This was calculated by using the total trial population, not
the licensed population.
3.21 The UK marking authorisation for rivaroxaban states that 'extension of treatment
beyond 12 months should be done on an individual patient basis as experience up

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
to 24 months is limited'. To reflect this, the company adjusted the proportion of
patients who continued on rivaroxaban treatment in the second year (that is from
48 to 60 weeks on wards). The proportion of patients selected was to allow an
overall continuation rate of 19% after 12 months and that this would decline to 0%
at the end of the second year. No treatment effect or cost was applied to those
patients who discontinued rivaroxaban treatment.
3.22 In the model patients had clopidogrel 75 mg once a day, aspirin 75 mg once a day
and rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily as appropriate. Because rivaroxaban entered
the treatment pathway after stabilisation of an acute coronary syndrome event,
any further differences in costs between the intervention and the comparator
were a result of acute coronary syndrome events and discontinuations related to
an acute coronary syndrome event.
3.23 Costs of acute coronary syndrome events were determined by the NHS reference
costs (2012 to 2013) of treating the event and the cost of follow up for the
patient. An assumption was made that if a patient had multiple acute events in
the long term, then the cost of hospitalisation and the follow up of two events
were applied. This was the case irrespective of the time between the events. It
was assumed that, on average, patients experienced 5, 14 and 28 days
rehabilitation after MI, ischaemic stroke and HS/ICH respectively. These
rehabilitation costs occurred in the first 3 months after the event. Transient event
costs were also included in the model.
3.24 The utility values associated with long-term health states were obtained from the
literature, primarily from NICE's technology appraisal guidance on ticagrelor for
the treatment of acute coronary syndromes. A study by Ara and Brazier was used
to calculate the improvement in health-related quality of life that patients would
experience in the stroke health states. The study was used to obtain the utility
values of patients with stroke in the UK at baseline and at 12 months after the
stroke occurred. Based on the utility values from these 2 time points, a 33%
improvement in health-related quality of life over 12 months was calculated for
patients who had strokes. To calculate the utility values for patients who had a
stroke 6 months after a previous stroke, the average of the stroke first 6 months
and the stroke (post 12 months) health states was taken. Utility values were
assumed to be the same for both rivaroxaban and standard care following any
event. For multiple event states, the utility values of two events that had occurred

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
were multiplied together. The company stated that this allowed for worsening
health-related quality of life following multiple events to be taken into account.
The utility value for the event-free health state was assumed to remain constant
over time. The resulting utility estimates were 0.842 for no event, 0.779 for
non-fatal MI, 0.821 for after MI, 0.703 for non-fatal stroke, and 0.703 for after
stroke.
3.25 For the licensed population, the company reported a deterministic incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £6,203 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY)
gained (incremental costs £764, incremental QALYs 0.12) for a life time horizon of
40 years for rivaroxaban compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin or aspirin alone.
3.26 The company conducted a series of 1-way deterministic sensitivity analyses.
Changes to the cost parameters, discount rates, utility values and risk estimates
for MI impacted on the base case ICER, but no factor increased the ICER to over
£10,000 per QALY gained. The company's probabilistic analysis showed that
rivaroxaban had a 99.9% probability of being cost effective compared with
clopidogrel plus aspirin or with aspirin alone if the maximum acceptable amount
for an additional QALY was £20,000.
Evidence Review Group comments
3.27 The ERG stated that the company undertook a comprehensive systematic review
of rivaroxaban for the prevention of adverse outcomes in patients after the acute
management of acute coronary syndrome. The ERG considered
ATLAS-ACS 2 TIMI 51 to be a well-designed, multicentre RCT of reasonable
quality.
3.28 The ERG questioned the generalisability of the population enrolled in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 to the population seen in clinical practice in England. The
ERG noted that of all patients randomised in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, 74% were
men and the mean age was 61.8 years. The ERG commented that patients with
acute coronary syndrome in England are usually older, with a mean age of
65 years and 72 years for patients with STEMI and NSTEMI respectively. It
highlighted that the EMA's assessment report noted that patients in the trial were
considered to be at low risk. Patients in the trial had little comorbidity, lower than

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
usual use of percutaneous coronary intervention and included a relatively small
proportion of people aged over 75 years or who had impaired renal impairment
with creatinine clearance less than 50 ml/min. As a result, the findings from
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 may not be applicable to an older population or to those
with a greater incidence of renal impairment and a higher baseline bleeding risk.
3.29 The ERG commented that mean treatment duration with rivaroxaban in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 was 13.1 months. As a result, the evidence on efficacy and
safety of rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily beyond this time is limited. The ERG
noted that this is reflected in the summary of product characteristics, which
recommends that extension of treatment beyond 12 months should be done on
an individual patient basis because experience up to 24 months is limited.
3.30 The ERG stated that the test 'elevated cardiac biomarker' is less sensitive than if
a patient exhibits a rise or fall in their cardiac biomarkers (preferably troponins),
because many patients have persistently elevated biomarkers outside the context
of acute coronary syndrome. In current practice, the diagnosis of NSTEMI
requires evidence of myocardial ischaemia with a rise or fall in the blood level of a
cardiac biomarker (troponin). In addition, the sensitivity of biomarker assays has
increased since the trial was conducted. If more sensitive assays had been
available during ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, more patients might have been diagnosed
with NSTEMI rather than unstable angina and therefore included in the licensed
population.
3.31 The ERG noted that there were numerical inconsistencies between the 2 dose
groups (2.5 mg twice daily and 5 mg twice daily) for the components of the
composite efficacy end points in the licensed population (see table 2). When the
components of the primary efficacy end points were analysed individually,
rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily significantly reduced the risk of death from CV
causes compared with placebo, but did not reduce the risk of MI or stroke. In
contrast, rivaroxaban 5 mg twice daily significantly reduced the risk of MI, but did
not reduce the risk of CV death or stroke. The ERG noted that the numerical
inconsistencies between the 2 dose groups had been extensively discussed in a
US FDA briefing document (albeit in the whole trial population of
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, rather than the licensed population). This briefing
document states that 'the proposition that a lower dose of an antithrombotic drug
is significantly more effective than a higher dose lacks biological plausibility'. The

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
ERG also noted that the EMA's assessment report concluded that these findings
may partly have been due to chance. The ERG therefore considered the hazard
ratios from the combined dose to be more plausible than those of the individual
doses.
3.32 The ERG considered the validity of the results from the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51
study to be questionable as a result of the high discontinuation rates from the
trial. The ERG noted that 15.5% of the total randomised population (n=15,526)
withdrew from the trial (2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice daily 15%; 5 mg rivaroxaban
twice daily 16.3%; placebo 15.1%). The ERG highlighted that the rates of
premature withdrawal in the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial were higher than other
similar randomised trials in patients with acute coronary syndrome: APPRAISE-2
(apixaban, 1.8% [131 out of 7392]); TRACER (vorapaxar, 5.9% [761 out of 12,944]);
PLATO (ticagrelor, 3.0% [562 out of 18,624]) and TRITON (prasugrel, 5.9% [804
out of 13,619]).
3.33 The ERG commented that because data were missing for people who withdrew
from the trial (proportion of patients with unknown vital statistics 3.2% [ITT
analysis, 495 out of 15,526]) there was a potential risk that this may have led to
informative censoring. That is, patients who drop out (and therefore are
censored) are more or less likely to experience the primary outcome of interest
compared with those remaining in the study, and this happens in a non-random
manner. This may be compounded if the reason for, or frequency of,
discontinuation differs between treatment groups. The ERG highlighted that no
detailed discussion was provided in the EMA's assessment report regarding this
issue. The ERG considered that the efficacy analyses were at risk of bias because
prognoses may differ in those patients who withdrew from the trial. The ERG
highlighted that the likely bias introduced by informative censoring in the clinical
outcomes and cost-effectiveness analyses was unknown.
3.34 The ERG stated that the structure of the company's model led to the potential for
systematic errors to occur, because the time between multiple events is not
tracked. This causes the potential for systematic errors in 3 ways. First, patients
who had 2 events in 1 time cycle were not distinguished from those patients who
had multiple events in separate time cycles. Second, for patients who had
multiple events in separate time cycles any improvement over time that they may
have experienced was ignored. Finally, for those patients who transition into the

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
multiple event states from the single event states, the first event was not tracked.
The ERG commented that there were 2 solutions to this problem. First, a more
complicated state transition cohort model could be developed so that cost and
utilities for each multiple event state can be varied by the preceding health state
and by the time between the events. Second, a patient-level simulation approach
could be taken.
3.35 The ERG stated that the population modelled by the company was the patient
subgroup who had elevated cardiac biomarkers and had not experienced a prior
stroke or TIA. Therefore, all issues with the generalisability of the results of
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 (see sections 3.3 and 3.28) and informative censoring (see
sections 3.10 and 3.33) also apply to the economic model results.
3.36 The ERG stated that the approach used by the company to calculate the
transition probabilities for the transient health states was inappropriate because
the cost and QALYs of the events that occurred in the second year were not
appropriately discounted. Also, there was no clear adjustment for the number of
additional patients who were assumed to discontinue rivaroxaban in year 2 or for
those patients who were assumed to discontinue clopidogrel or rivaroxaban
treatment after an acute coronary syndrome event.
3.37 The ERG commented that it was not clear in the submission how the patients who
continued rivaroxaban treatment after 1 year were selected from the rest of the
patient population. The ERG stated that it was unknown whether the base-case
parameters for the change in efficacy and costs represent patient discontinuation
in the second year of treatment.
3.38 The ERG had concerns with the methodology used by the company to calculate
the utility values for patients who had a stroke. The ERG stated that it was
unclear why the values from Ara and Brazier were appropriate to calculate the
improvement in health-related quality of life of patients who experienced a
stroke, but not considered appropriate to be used as the utility values in the
economic model.
3.39 The ERG had concerns about how the improvement in utility values over time was
modelled in the multiple event states. If a hypothetical patient transitioned into
the multiple event states from a single event state, their utility in the multiple

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
event state could be understated, because improvement in utility after the first
event had been ignored. The ERG stated that that this problem was again related
to the inability of the model to distinguish when events had occurred. The ERG
noted that this was not the only assumption that the company could have made
to calculate the utility value in the multiple event states. It could have assumed
that the lowest utility value of the 2 events applied to the patients or, if the model
could track the chronicity of events, it could have assumed that the utility of the
most recent event applied.
3.40 The ERG expressed concerns about the appropriateness of the methods used to
model the costs of rivaroxaban, clopidogrel and aspirin and the efficacy data
(shape and scale parameters of the Weibull curve) in the probabilistic sensitivity
analysis. The ERG recalculated the probabilistic sensitivity analysis and found
that the results were generally more favourable to rivaroxaban, producing more
incremental QALYs at a lower incremental cost.
3.41 The ERG commented that there were a number of key parameters that could not
be adjusted within the model, which may have changed the ICER to a greater
extent. These included: amendments to the hazard ratio for fatal bleeds; using
pooled efficacy data rather than the 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice-daily dose alone;
and adjusting for the possibility of informative bias.
3.42 The ERG conducted an exploratory probabilistic sensitivity analysis in which
published levels of uncertainty around the utility value estimates and the
reference costs, rather than an arbitrary range, were taken into account. The
resulting probabilistic ICER was £6,150 per QALY gained for rivaroxaban plus
clopidogrel plus aspirin or rivaroxaban plus aspirin, compared with clopidogrel
plus aspirin or aspirin alone. The ERG noted that its probabilistic ICER was similar
to the company's deterministic ICER.
3.43 The ERG addressed its concerns about informative censoring (see section 3.33)
by conducting a 'crude' exploratory sensitivity analysis, to explore the effects on
the ICER of increasing the number of patients who experienced a fatal bleeding
event with rivaroxaban (assuming that the event occurred immediately on taking
rivaroxaban). The ERG considered a range of additional fatal bleeding events
ranging from no additional fatal bleeding events (company's base case) to
20 additional bleeding events. Because there were 21 fatal bleeding events in the

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
combined rivaroxaban treatment arms of the total population in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51, the ERG considered that 20 additional fatal bleeding
events was an unfavourable scenario for the rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice-daily dose.
The result of the ERG's exploratory analysis showed that even if rivaroxaban
2.5 mg twice a day caused an additional 20 fatal bleeding events compared with
the event rate observed in the trial, the ICER was not estimated to be greater
than £10,000 per QALY gained.
3.44 The ERG also undertook a series of exploratory scenario analyses. When the
following changes to the model were implemented, the ERG's preferred
deterministic base-case ICER was £5,622 per QALY gained (compared with the
company's deterministic base-case ICER of £6,203 per QALY gained):
• The transition probabilities were estimated from the trial data rather than
using the Weibull curves.
• The treatment duration of rivaroxaban was limited to 1 year.
• Age-adjusted utility values for the whole population from Ara and Brazier's
formula were used to adjust the no-event health state.
• Only 1 cost was applied to the multiple event states. Where there were
2 different costs added together in the company's base case, the maximum
of the 2 costs was applied.
• No improvement over time in the stroke utility was modelled.
• The relative risk of having a subsequent event, given that an event had
already occurred, was amended.
• The life-years gained matrix and the costs were adjusted for the 12-week
cycle length in the observation period.
3.45 Full details of all the evidence are in the committee papers.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of rivaroxaban, having considered evidence on the nature of acute
coronary syndrome and the value placed on the benefits of rivaroxaban by
people with the condition, those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It
also took into account the effective use of NHS resources.
4.2 The Committee discussed the clinical management of acute coronary syndrome
in England. The Committee understood that treatment options for people with ST
segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) include percutaneous coronary
intervention followed by dual antiplatelet therapy, prasugrel in combination with
aspirin (for people who have had percutaneous coronary intervention or in whom
it is planned), ticagrelor in combination with low-dose aspirin, or clopidogrel in
combination with low-dose aspirin. It also understood that people with non-ST
segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) are offered treatments
depending on their Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) or
thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) score and that these include a range
of options from aspirin alone to percutaneous coronary intervention, depending
on the risk of future events. The Committee heard from the clinical experts that
ticagrelor and prasugrel have potential advantages over clopidogrel because of
their faster antiplatelet action, although they are associated with higher bleeding
risk. The Committee also heard from the clinical experts that the use of
clopidogrel in clinical practice was generally decreasing as uptake of the newer
agents increased, but that there was variation in practice with different centres
often having their own local protocols for the treatment of acute coronary
syndrome. The Committee heard from the clinical experts that because of its
different mechanism of action, rivaroxaban could be a useful additional treatment
option for some patients receiving clopidogrel plus aspirin or aspirin alone,
although it was not possible to identify a particular subgroup of patients for
whom it would be most suitable. However, the clinical experts highlighted that
there is some uncertainty as to when and how it would be best incorporated into
the treatment pathway. They explained that the mean time to start rivaroxaban in
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 was 4.6 days, but the majority of patients in England have
been discharged from hospital by then. The clinical experts further explained that
if rivaroxaban was started in secondary care this could result in patients staying

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
in hospital longer, which would not happen if it was started in primary care. The
Committee heard from its GP members that, after an acute coronary syndrome
event, patients would usually be seen by their GP within 1 week of being
discharged from hospital. The Committee considered that a discharge summary
which is sent to the patient's GP at the time of discharge would give sufficient
information for the GP to start treatment with rivaroxaban. The Committee
recognised that rivaroxaban may be a useful additional treatment option for
selected patients and noted that in the trial it was started between 1 to 7 days
after acute coronary syndrome, but acknowledged that its introduction might
have an effect on existing patient pathways.
4.3 The Committee discussed the clinical need for treatment in people with acute
coronary syndrome. The Committee heard that the symptoms of acute coronary
syndrome vary according to the type and severity of the disease. It was
highlighted that common symptoms of acute coronary syndrome are chest pain,
breathlessness and anxiety, and that the experience is painful and frightening. It
was also highlighted that acute coronary syndrome may have a negative impact
on the quality of life of the person and their family, as a result of worries over
their future health and capability. The Committee heard from the patient expert
about the importance of having timely diagnosis and effective treatments
available for acute coronary syndrome. The Committee also heard that people
were generally prepared to accept a certain risk of bleeding associated with
antiplatelet therapy or anticoagulant treatment such as rivaroxaban if the
treatment lowered their risk of further cardiovascular events sufficiently, but the
patient expert stressed the need for efficient symptom management with regular
reviews. The Committee acknowledged the impact on patients and families of the
symptoms of acute coronary syndrome and the increased risk of further events
that followed it. The Committee concluded that an additional treatment to reduce
the risk of further cardiovascular events would be useful, but that the additional
bleeding risk should be taken into account for any individual when considering
starting treatment.
Clinical effectiveness
4.4 The Committee considered the clinical-effectiveness data from the
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial comparing rivaroxaban in combination with aspirin plus

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
clopidogrel or aspirin alone against aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone. It
noted that this formed the basis of the clinical-effectiveness evidence in the
company's submission. The Committee considered that the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51
trial was of good quality but noted that a key issue highlighted by the ERG was
the generalisability of the results to people diagnosed with acute coronary
syndrome in England. The Committee noted that people with acute coronary
syndrome in clinical practice are usually older than those patients who were
recruited to ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51. The Committee also noted that patients in the
trial could be considered a relatively low-risk population because they had little
comorbidity, lower than usual use of percutaneous coronary intervention and
included a relatively small proportion of people aged over 75 years or with
impaired renal function. The Committee heard from the clinical experts that the
average age difference between the trial population and patients seen in clinical
practice was not likely to be clinically significant and that patients recruited to
ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 were similar in terms of baseline characteristics to those
recruited to other trials in acute coronary syndrome. The Committee was
persuaded that the issue of generalisability was similar across all trials in this
condition, and concluded that the results of ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 were relevant
to routine clinical practice.
4.5 The Committee considered the results of the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial. The
Committee noted that the company had presented clinical-effectiveness results
for the overall trial population and also for a post hoc subgroup analysis of
patients with elevated cardiac biomarkers (STEMI and NSTEMI) and no history of
a stroke or TIA (80% of the total trial population). The Committee was aware from
the company that this post hoc subgroup analysis was carried out at the request
of the European Medicines Agency (EMA). The Committee noted that this post
hoc subgroup analysis (referred to as the licensed population by the company)
provided efficacy results that tended to be more favourable to rivaroxaban than
the results from the overall trial population. However, it acknowledged that these
differences were unlikely to be sufficiently large as to have an impact on the
overall decision as to whether rivaroxaban was clinically and cost effective in its
licensed indication.
4.6 The Committee discussed the numerical inconsistencies between the 2 dose
groups in the trial (2.5 mg twice daily and 5 mg twice daily) for the individual
components of the composite efficacy end point that had been identified by the

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
ERG (see section 3.31). It was aware that for some individual outcomes the
2.5 mg twice-daily dose appeared to have a greater efficacy than the 5 mg
twice-daily dose. The ERG considered that it was unlikely that the 2.5 mg
twice-daily dose would be more clinically effective than 5 mg twice daily and
suggested that the results from both doses combined were more plausible than
those of the individual doses. The Committee heard from the company that the
summary of product characteristics for rivaroxaban specified the 2.5 mg
twice-daily dose and that the EMA had based its decision for this dose based on
the balance of risk and benefits of the 2.5 mg twice-daily dose, compared with
those of the 5 mg twice-daily dose. The Committee noted the lower bleeding risk
associated with the 2.5 mg twice-daily dose compared with the 5 mg twice-daily
dose. While it acknowledged that there were numerical inconsistencies in the
efficacy results between the 2.5 mg and 5 mg twice-daily arms, it concluded that
the efficacy data from the 2.5 mg twice-daily rivaroxaban arm were the most
relevant for decision-making because it is the licensed dose of rivaroxaban for
this indication.
4.7 The Committee discussed the high discontinuation rates from the trial (see
section 3.10). The Committee was aware that 15.5% of the total randomised
population prematurely discontinued from the trial and that the discontinuation
rate was higher in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 than in other similar randomised trials in
patients with acute coronary syndrome. The Committee heard from the clinical
experts that high discontinuation rates were common in trials in patients with
acute coronary syndrome and that this is replicated in the adherence rates seen
in clinical practice, because current treatment protocols mean that people who
had acute coronary syndrome are already taking 5 separate medications. The
clinical experts highlighted that clinicians are mindful of the effect on patient
adherence of adding any additional treatments to those already prescribed. The
Committee acknowledged that the discontinuation rates in ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51
were high but that this was a concern for other trials carried out in people with
acute coronary syndrome, and that it was also an issue that is seen in clinical
practice.
4.8 The Committee discussed the missing data from people who withdrew or were
lost from the trial (see section 3.10). The Committee was aware of the ERG's
concerns that missing data may result in informative censoring (that is, patients
who drop out, and whose data are therefore censored, have different outcomes

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
to those who remain in the trial) leading to bias. The Committee was aware from
the company that extensive efforts had been made to trace trial participants, to
clarify reasons for withdrawal and to find out if they had died. The company
stated that this had reduced the proportion of patients for whom vital status was
unknown to 3.2% of people who had been recruited to the trial. The company
explained that it had been unable to obtain the data for the remaining
participants for whom vital status was unknown, because of restrictions imposed
by the countries in which the people lived. The clinical experts acknowledged
that this was a problem for many multinational trials in people with acute
coronary syndrome but expressed their concern about the level of missing data,
given the bleeding risks associated with rivaroxaban added to antiplatelet
therapy. The Committee understood that the EMA's assessment report had not
discussed this issue in detail but acknowledged the clinical experts' concerns
regarding the missing data. The Committee concluded that the missing data from
those who withdrew or were lost from the trial remained of concern, but the
magnitude of any bias introduced by informative censoring was unknown.
4.9 The Committee considered the effectiveness of rivaroxaban in combination with
aspirin plus clopidogrel or with aspirin alone, compared with aspirin plus
clopidogrel or aspirin alone in the licensed population (that is, people with
elevated cardiac biomarkers and without a history of stroke or TIA). The
Committee noted that rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily in combination with aspirin
plus clopidogrel or with aspirin alone reduced the composite risk of myocardial
infarction, stroke and death from cardiovascular causes by 20% compared with
aspirin plus clopidogrel or with aspirin alone (see table 2: ALL strata, 2.5 mg
twice-daily rivaroxaban dose). The Committee understood that this composite
reduction in risk was driven by reductions in cardiovascular death and myocardial
infarction. The Committee concluded that rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily in
combination with aspirin plus clopidogrel or with aspirin alone was more effective
than aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone for preventing myocardial infarction
and death from cardiovascular causes in people with acute coronary syndrome
and elevated cardiac biomarkers.
4.10 The Committee discussed the concerns about safety and adverse effects
associated with rivaroxaban. The Committee was aware that the results for the
licensed population showed that there was a dose-dependent increase in the
rate of non-CABG TIMI major bleeds (major bleeding assessed using

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
'Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction' criteria not related to coronary-artery
bypass grafting) for rivaroxaban added to antiplatelet therapy compared with
antiplatelet therapy alone. It noted that in the 2.5 mg rivaroxaban twice-daily arm
of the ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 study, there was a 3 times greater risk of non-CABG
TIMI major bleeding with rivaroxaban in combination with aspirin plus clopidogrel
or aspirin compared with these antiplatelet therapies alone. The Committee
acknowledged that all antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatments have an
associated risk of bleeding but noted the comments it had heard from the clinical
and patient experts that the risk of bleeding was a key consideration when
deciding on a particular treatment. The Committee was aware that no data had
been presented by the company or other stakeholders comparing the risk of
bleeding with rivaroxaban in combination with antiplatelet agents compared with
other treatment regimens with antiplatelet agents such as ticagrelor and
prasugrel, because these were not included in the final scope. The Committee
was therefore unable to compare the effectiveness and safety profile of a
treatment strategy in which rivaroxaban is added to clopidogrel and aspirin at
least 24 hours after admission to hospital, with strategies in which ticagrelor and
prasugrel are added to aspirin from the start of treatment. The Committee
concluded that treatment with rivaroxaban resulted in more non-CABG-related
major bleeding than aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone, but also recognised
the particular importance of the effects of rivaroxaban in reducing the risk of
myocardial infarction and death from cardiovascular causes. The Committee also
concluded that clinicians should undertake a careful assessment of whether the
bleeding risk is outweighed by the benefits of rivaroxaban in preventing further
ischaemic events for individual patients when deciding whether to start or
continue treatment. The Committee noted that the summary of product
characteristics states that treatment should be regularly evaluated and, in
particular, that careful consideration should be given to whether treatment is
continued beyond 12 months because experience of treatment with rivaroxaban
up to 24 months is limited.
Cost effectiveness
4.11 The Committee considered the company's economic model and the review and
exploratory sensitivity analyses performed by the ERG. The Committee noted
that the ICERs presented by the company in its base-case analysis and in the

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
ERG's exploratory sensitivity analyses were all lower than £10,000 per QALY
gained. The Committee was aware of the ERG's concerns about the structure of
the company's economic model and, in particular, that the model is relatively
inflexible. This meant that the ERG could not carry out all the exploratory
analyses that it deemed potentially relevant. These included amendments to the
hazard ratio for fatal bleeds and adjusting for the possibility of informative
censoring. The Committee noted that, to explore its concerns about informative
censoring, the ERG had undertaken a 'crude' exploratory analysis to explore the
effects on the ICER of increasing the number of patients who experienced a fatal
bleed with rivaroxaban. The Committee was aware that the analysis showed that
even if rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily caused as many as 20 more fatal bleeds
than observed in the trial, the estimated ICER remained below £10,000 per QALY
gained. The Committee concluded that despite the inflexibility of the company's
economic model and the resulting constraints on the ERG's ability to undertake
further exploratory analyses, the ICERs presented were a suitable basis for
decision-making on the cost effectiveness of rivaroxaban in addition to
clopidogrel plus aspirin or with aspirin alone.
4.12 The Committee considered the ICER for the 2.5 mg dose of rivaroxaban in
combination with aspirin plus clopidogrel or with aspirin alone, compared with
aspirin plus clopidogrel or aspirin alone in patients with acute coronary syndrome
with elevated cardiac biomarkers (STEMI or NSTEMI) and no history of stroke or
TIA. The Committee noted that the company's base-case ICER was £6,203 per
QALY gained, and the ERG's preferred base-case estimate was £5,622 per QALY
gained. It accepted that there is uncertainty about the validity of the results
based on ATLAS-ACS 2-TIMI 51 because of the risk of bias resulting from missing
data and informative censoring. However, the Committee considered that the
ICERs presented were all within the range that could be considered cost effective
and that the results of the ERG's exploratory sensitivity and scenario analyses
suggested that the ICER was unlikely to increase to the extent that it would
become unacceptable. It concluded that rivaroxaban can be considered a
cost-effective use of NHS resources.
4.13 The Committee was aware that there is an increased risk of bleeding when
rivaroxaban is added to aspirin or aspirin plus clopidogrel and it would be
important for clinicians to carefully assess a person's individual bleeding risk and
for patients to have an informed discussion with their clinician about the potential

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
risks and benefits before starting treatment with rivaroxaban. The Committee
noted that the summary of product characteristics states that after initiation,
there should be regular assessment of the risks and benefits of continuing
treatment with rivaroxaban and extension of treatment beyond 12 months should
be done on an individual patient basis as experience up to 24 months is limited.
The Committee concluded that it was appropriate that a formal assessment of
whether to continue treatment should be made no later than 12 months after
starting rivaroxaban.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has had acute management of acute coronary syndrome and the
healthcare professional responsible for their care thinks that rivaroxaban is the
right treatment, it should be available for use, in line with NICE's
recommendations.

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
6 Appraisal Committee members,
guideline representatives and NICE
project team
Appraisal Committee members
The Appraisal Committees are standing advisory committees of NICE. Members are
appointed for a 3-year term. A list of the Committee members who took part in the
discussions for this appraisal appears below. There are 4 Appraisal Committees, each with
a chair and vice chair. Each Appraisal Committee meets once a month, except in
December when there are no meetings. Each Committee considers its own list of
technologies, and ongoing topics are not moved between Committees.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each Appraisal Committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
Dr Jane Adam (Chair)
Consultant radiologist, Department of Diagnostic Radiology, St George's Hospital, London
Dr Graham Ash
Consultant in General Adult Psychiatry, Lancashire Care NHS Foundation Trust
Professor Thanos Athanasiou
Professor of Cardiovascular Sciences and Cardiac Surgery, Imperial College London;
Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust
Dr Simon Bond
Senior Statistician, Cambridge Clinical Trials Unit

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
Dr Jeremy Braybrooke
Consultant Medical Oncologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Dr Gerardine Bryant
GP, Swadlincote, Derbyshire
Professor Aileen Clarke
Professor of Public Health & Health Services Research, University of Warwick
Dr Andrew England
Senior Lecturer, Directorate of Radiography, University of Salford
Dr Brian Hawkins
Chief Pharmacist, Cwm Taf Health Board, South Wales
Dr Peter Heywood
Consultant Neurologist, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol
Dr Anne McCune
Consultant Hepatologist, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust
Professor John McMurray
Professor of Medical Cardiology, University of Glasgow
Dr Alec Miners
Senior Lecturer in Health Economics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Dr Mohit Misra
GP, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, London
Ms Sarah Parry
Clinical Nurse Specialist, Paediatric Pain Management, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children
Ms Pamela Rees
Lay member
Dr Ann Richardson
Lay member

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
Dr Paul Robinson
Medical Director, Merck Sharp & Dohme
Ms Ellen Rule
Director of Transformation and Service Redesign, Gloucestershire Clinical Commissioning
Group
Dr Brian Shine
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
Dr Peter Sims
GP, Devon
Mr David Thomson
Lay member
Dr John Watkins
Clinical Senior Lecturer, Cardiff University; Consultant in Public Health Medicine, National
Public Health Service Wales
Professor Olivia Wu
Professor of Health Technology Assessment, University of Glasgow
NICE project team
Each technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology
analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical adviser and a project
manager.
Helen Tucker and Mary Hughes
Technical Leads
Nicola Hay
Technical Adviser
Bijal Joshi
Project Manager

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
7 Sources of evidence considered by the
Committee
The Evidence Review Group (ERG) report for this appraisal was prepared by the School of
Health and Related Research (ScHARR), The University of Sheffield:
• Pandor A, Pollard D, Stevenson M, et al., Rivaroxaban for the prevention of adverse
outcomes in patients after the acute management of acute coronary syndrome: a
single technology appraisal (August 2014)
The following organisations accepted the invitation to participate in this appraisal as
consultees and commentators. They were invited to comment on the draft scope, the ERG
report and the appraisal consultation document (ACD). Companies were also invited to
make written submissions. Professional or specialist and patient or carer groups, and other
consultees, had the opportunity to give their expert views. Companies, professional or
specialist and patient or carer groups, and other consultees, also have the opportunity to
appeal against the final appraisal determination.
Company:
• Bayer (rivaroxaban)
Professional or specialist and patient or carer groups:
• British Heart Foundation
• Pumping Marvellous
• Royal College of Nursing
• Royal College of Pathologists
• Royal College of Physicians
• United Kingdom Clinical Pharmacy Association
Other consultees:
• Department of Health

Rivaroxaban for preventing adverse outcomes after acute management of acute coronary
syndrome (TA335)
• NHS England
• Welsh Government
Commentator organisations (did not provide written evidence and without the right of
appeal):
• Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety for Northern Ireland
• Healthcare Improvement Scotland
• Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
• National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment Programme
• School of Health and Related Research Sheffield (ScHARR)
The following individuals were selected from clinical expert and patient expert nominations
from the consultees and commentators. They gave their expert personal view on
rivaroxaban by attending the initial Committee discussion and providing written evidence
to the Committee. They were also invited to comment on the ACD.
• Dr James Cotton, Consultant Cardiologist, nominated by organisation representing
British Cardiovascular Intervention Society – clinical expert
• Professor Carlo Di Mario, Consultant Cardiologist, nominated by organisation
representing Bayer – clinical expert
• Mr Nick Hartshorne-Evans, nominated by organisation representing Pumping
Marvellous Foundation – patient expert
• Ms Jayne Knowles-Smith, nominated by organisation representing Pumping
Marvellous Foundation – patient expert
Representatives from the following company attended Committee meetings. They
contributed only when asked by the Committee chair to clarify specific issues and
comment on factual accuracy.
• Bayer
ISBN: 978-1-4731-1092-2
