=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "stentgraft-placement-in-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm-pdf-1899863338916293.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:50:25.868620",
  "file_size_bytes": 69850,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/stentgraft-placement-in-abdominal-aortic-aneurysm-pdf-1899863338916293.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Stent-graft placement in
abdominal aortic aneurysm
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 22 March 2006
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg163
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 2 ---
Stent-graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG163)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG10.
1 Guidance
This guidance replaces the previous interventional procedures guidance on stent-
graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG10). The interventional procedures
advisory committee reconsidered the procedure based on the results of a systematic
review commissioned by NICE, following publication of the results of the
EndoVascular Aneurysm Repair (EVAR) trials.
1.1 Current evidence on the efficacy and short-term safety of stent–graft placement
in abdominal aortic aneurysm appears adequate to support the use of this
procedure provided that the normal arrangements are in place for consent, audit
and clinical governance.
1.2 Clinicians should ensure that patients fully understand the long-term
uncertainties and the potential complications associated with this procedure. In
particular, patients should understand: the risks of endovascular leaks; the
possibility of secondary intervention; and the need for lifelong follow-up. Patients
should be provided with clear written information. In addition, use of the
information for the public for this guidance is recommended.
1.3 Patient selection is important, particularly for patients who would normally be
considered unfit for surgery.
1.4 Publication of long-term data would be useful. It is recommended that all patients
who have the procedure are entered onto one of the existing registries.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 3 ---
Stent-graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG163)
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Stent–graft placement is used to treat aneurysms of the abdominal aorta.
Weakening of the wall of the aorta can lead to widening of the vessel, or
aneurysm. Aneurysms may rupture causing internal bleeding which, if untreated,
is usually fatal.
2.1.2 The standard treatment for abdominal aortic aneurysm is open surgical repair.
The aneurysm is opened and a graft is then sewn in above and below the
weakened area to allow normal blood flow.
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Stent–graft placement is a minimally invasive alternative to open repair. The graft
is mounted on a stent, which is inserted into the aorta via catheters in the
femoral arteries. The stent–graft is deployed under X-ray guidance and
positioned across the aneurysm. Additional endovascular or surgical interventions
may be necessary to complete the procedure, such as insertion of stents into the
iliac arteries, occlusion of selected arteries and femoro-femoral bypass grafts.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 A systematic review of the published evidence on this procedure was
commissioned by the Institute and completed in June 2005. A total of 77 studies
were identified for inclusion. This comprised: four randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) including the EndoVascular Aneurysm Repair (EVAR) 1 trial comparing
stent–graft placement and open surgical repair, and the EVAR 2 trial comparing
stent–graft placement in patients considered unfit for surgical repair with
standard medical care; 17 non-randomised controlled trials; 22 comparative
observational studies; 28 case series and 6 registry publications.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 4 ---
Stent-graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG163)
2.3.2 Data from the EVAR 1 trial at a median follow-up of 35 months reported an
aneurysm rupture rate of 0.9% (5 of 543) following endovascular repair,
compared with 0.2% (1 of 539) following open repair. Early aneurysm rupture
rates of 0.2% (1 of 534) and 0.3% (13 of 3,859) were reported in 1 non-
randomised controlled trial and 7 case series, respectively.
2.3.3 In the EVAR 1 trial, 16% (85 of 529) of patients required secondary intervention
following stent–graft placement, compared with 7% (36 of 519) of patients
following open repair. From the non-randomised controlled studies, secondary
intervention rates were 20% following stent–graft placement and 6% following
open repair.
2.3.4 The EVAR 2 trial reported that at 4 years, 26% of the group who had had
stent–graft placement had required at least 1 additional intervention compared
with 4% of the group who had received standard medical care. However, if
crossovers are considered a secondary intervention, then the secondary
intervention rate in the group that received standard medical care became
comparable (approximately 30%). For more details, refer to the sources of
evidence.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 From a meta-analysis of data from 3 RCTs, stent–graft placement was associated
with a 30-day mortality rate of 2% (12 of 759 patients) compared with 5% (33 of
709 patients) for open repair. In patients considered unfit for surgery, the 30-day
mortality following stent–graft placement was 9% (13 of 150 patients).
2.4.2 During more prolonged follow-up to 4 years, the EVAR 1 trial reported no
significant difference between the all-cause mortality rate in the group that had
had stent–graft placement and the group that had had open repair.
2.4.3 The most common adverse event following stent–graft placement was endoleak
originating from retrograde collateral flow into the aneurysm sac via aortic
branches (type II). This occurred in 19% of patients at 1 year. Recent
developments have led to a lower incidence of procedural and post-procedural
complications. The incidence of pulmonary complications and haemorrhagic
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 5 ---
Stent-graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG163)
events was significantly lower in the stent–graft placement group than in the
open repair group.
2.4.4 Technical complications included stent migration, which happened in 1% of
patients within the first year, and stent wire fracture, which happened in 3% of
patients within the first year. For more details, refer to the sources of evidence.
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 It was noted that these procedures are rapidly evolving.
2.5.2 The follow-up phase of the EVAR trials continues, and long-term results are
expected to be published in 2010.
3 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the interventional procedures advisory committee is
described in the systematic review update of the recent evidence for the safety and
efficacy of elective endovascular repair in the management of infrarenal abdominal aortic
aneurysms.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information on this procedure for patients and carers. It explains the
nature of the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with
patient consent in mind.
Other NICE recommendations on endovascular
stent-grafts
In March 2020, NICE published guidance on abdominal aortic aneurysm that complements
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
--- Страница 6 ---
Stent-graft placement in abdominal aortic aneurysm (IPG163)
this guidance.
Update information
Minor changes since publication
January 2012: minor maintenance.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-5902-0
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 6
