=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "supraorbital-minicraniotomy-for-intracranial-aneurysm-pdf-52774401357781.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:51:10.574300",
  "file_size_bytes": 58815,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/supraorbital-minicraniotomy-for-intracranial-aneurysm-pdf-52774401357781.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Supraorbital minicraniotomy for
intracranial aneurysm
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 25 August 2004
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg84
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 2 ---
Supraorbital minicraniotomy for intracranial aneurysm (IPG84)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Guidance
1.1 Current evidence on the safety and efficacy of supraorbital minicraniotomy for
intracranial aneurysm appears adequate to support the use of this procedure
provided that the normal arrangements are in place for consent, audit and clinical
governance.
2 The procedure
2.1 Indications
2.1.1 Cerebral aneurysms are small balloon-like dilated portions of blood vessels that
may occasionally rupture, causing haemorrhage, stroke or death. Therapy is
designed to support recovery from the initial bleed, together with specific
treatment to prevent re-bleeding.
2.1.2 The majority of cerebral aneurysms arise from the major blood vessels in the
centre of the head as they cross the space between the skull and the brain (the
subarachnoid space). The standard surgical approach to this area is through an
incision in the scalp, just in front of the ear, and an opening in the underlying
bone on the side of the head. The abnormal vessels are approached side-on in
the subarachnoid space beneath the brain. The surgical treatment of cerebral
aneurysms involves placing a permanent clip across the neck of the aneurysm
(effectively closing the neck of the balloon) to separate it from the normal vessel
while preserving blood flow to the brain. If clipping is not possible, the aneurysm
may be reinforced by wrapping it with synthetic material to reduce the risk of
rupture.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 3 ---
Supraorbital minicraniotomy for intracranial aneurysm (IPG84)
2.2 Outline of the procedure
2.2.1 Supraorbital minicraniotomy is an alternative approach through a smaller incision
made above the eyebrow and through the underlying skull. This allows a front-on
approach to the abnormal vessels. The aneurysm is then clipped or wrapped
using conventional microsurgical instruments.
2.3 Efficacy
2.3.1 No controlled studies were identified. In two studies, all the aneurysms were
either successfully clipped or wrapped, but length of follow-up was not reported.
In another study, 89% (33 out of 37 patients) showed good recovery on the
Glasgow Outcome Scale, but it was not clear how many of the patients were
followed up for the entire duration of the study (17 months). This study also
reported good cosmetic outcomes following surgery. For more details, see the
overview.
2.3.2 One Specialist Advisor considered it unlikely that the efficacy of treating an
aneurysm would be affected by the small exposure used in this procedure when
compared with the standard surgical approach.
2.4 Safety
2.4.1 In the three case series reviewed, rupture of the aneurysm during surgery
occurred in 3% (4 out of 139), 2% (2 out of 102) and 3% (1 out of 37) of patients.
Other adverse events were: death within 8 days of surgery (4%, 4 out of 102);
central nervous system infection (2%, 2 out of 102); impaired cerebrospinal fluid
circulation requiring shunting (7%, 7 out of 102); supraorbital nerve damage (11%,
4 out of 37); and wound infection (3%, 1 out of 37). For more details, see the
overview.
2.4.2 The Specialist Advisors had no major safety concerns.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
--- Страница 4 ---
Supraorbital minicraniotomy for intracranial aneurysm (IPG84)
2.5 Other comments
2.5.1 This procedure involves a different surgical approach for performing an
established procedure (craniotomy for intracranial aneurysm) and, although there
may be a greater risk of per-operative rupture, this has usually been managed
successfully.
2.5.2 There is an increasing trend to deal with aneurysms by endoluminal techniques.
3 Further information
Sources of evidence
The evidence considered by the Interventional Procedures Advisory Committee is
described in the overview.
Information for patients
NICE has produced information for the public on this procedure. It explains the nature of
the procedure and the guidance issued by NICE, and has been written with patient
consent in mind.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-6219-8
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 4
