Symptoms of peripheral arterial disease: ramipril
Summary
The evidence for the efficacy of ramipril in relieving the symptoms of peripheral arterial
disease is very limited.
Two small RCTs (Ahimastos et al. 2006, n=40 and Shahin et al. 2013a, n=33) found that,
compared with placebo, over 24 weeks, ramipril 10 mg daily improved maximum and
pain-free walking times and distances in people with stable intermittent claudication, a
symptom of peripheral arterial disease. However, while these differences were statistically
significant, the clinical importance of the results is unclear. No adverse effects were
reported in 1 study. In the other study, the adverse effect most often reported with ramipril

 
was cough, which led to discontinuation in some cases.
The studies have many limitations and ramipril has not been compared directly with other
treatments for intermittent claudication. Higher quality evidence on the efficacy and safety
of ramipril is needed in order to determine its place in therapy.
A third study (n=212) was originally included in this evidence summary but has now been
removed. This follows a statement published in the Journal of the American Medical
Association (JAMA), which advises that the study has been retracted after the lead author
admitted to fabricating the results of this and a related study. This author was also the
lead author for another study included in this evidence summary (Ahimastos et al. 2006)
and it is unclear whether the integrity of that study is also affected. However, because of
the paucity of evidence, the decision has been taken to present the results, with the
proviso that the data may not be robust.
Regulatory status: Ramipril is licensed for reducing cardiovascular risk in people with
peripheral arterial disease, but its use to treat symptoms of peripheral arterial disease is
off-label.
Effectiveness Safety
Compared with placebo over
• According to the summary of product
24 weeks, ramipril 10 mg daily
characteristics for Tritace, common adverse
statistically significantly improved:
effects of ramipril (seen in between 1 in 10 and
1 in 100 people) include headache, dizziness,
• mean maximum walking time
cough, sinusitis, dyspnoea, gastrointestinal
and mean pain-free walking
disturbances, rash, muscle spasms, myalgia,
time (Ahimastos et al. 2006,
hyperkalaemia, hypotension, syncope, chest
n=40; both p<0.001; clinical
pain and fatigue.
importance unclear)
• No adverse effects were reported the study by
• mean maximum walking
Ahimastos et al. (2006). In Shahin et al.
distance and mean pain-free
(2013a), the adverse effect most often
walking distance (Shahin et al.
reported with ramipril was cough, which led to
2013a, n=33; both p=0.001;
discontinuation in some cases.
clinical importance unclear).

 
Patient factors Resource implications
• Renal function should be • The cost of 28 days' treatment with ramipril
assessed before and during 10 mg is £1.28 for capsules, £1.32 for tablets
ramipril treatment, particularly and £358.40 for 2.5 mg/5 ml oral solution
in people with renal impairment. (Drug Tariff, October 2015).
• The results of the studies may
not be generalisable to people
with certain comorbid
conditions (for example,
disease limiting mobility or renal
impairment).
• Most of the participants in the
studies were white and it is
known that ACE inhibitors are
less effective for treating
hypertension in people of
African or Caribbean family
origin; therefore, the studies
may not apply to this
population.
• It is not known how ramipril
compares with other treatments
for intermittent claudication.
Introduction and current guidance
Peripheral arterial disease, also known as peripheral vascular disease, is a condition in
which arteries that carry blood to the legs (or less commonly the arms) are narrowed or
blocked. Peripheral arterial disease is generally caused by atherosclerosis and it is
associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events even when it is asymptomatic.
The most common initial symptom of peripheral arterial disease is pain in the legs while
walking, which is relieved by rest, known as intermittent claudication.
Treatment options for intermittent claudication include management of cardiovascular risk

 
factors (for example, smoking, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, using antiplatelet drugs
and statins), supervised exercise and vasoactive drug treatment (naftidrofuryl oxalate).
See the NICE guideline on lower limb peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis and
management for more information.
Full text of introduction and current guidance.
Product overview
Ramipril is an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE inhibitor) that is licensed for
treating hypertension, renal disease and symptomatic heart failure. It is also licensed for
the secondary prevention of acute myocardial infarction, and the reduction of
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in people with manifest atherothrombotic
cardiovascular disease (including peripheral arterial disease) or diabetes with at least one
cardiovascular risk factor. See the summary of product characteristics for Tritace for more
information.
This evidence summary considers the evidence for using ramipril to treat the symptoms of
peripheral arterial disease (intermittent claudication), rather than for reducing
cardiovascular risk in people with peripheral arterial disease. The use of ramipril to treat
symptoms of peripheral arterial disease is off-label.
Full text of product overview.
Evidence review
• This evidence summary discusses 2 randomised controlled trials (RCTs: Ahimastos et
al. 2006 and Shahin et al. 2013a [n=40 and n=33 respectively]) that evaluated ramipril
for treating people with stable intermittent claudication and concurrent medical
treatment, and no comorbid conditions limiting walking ability or renal impairment.
Participants were randomised to receive ramipril 10 mg daily or placebo for 24 weeks
(including a 2-week dose titration period using ramipril 5 mg daily in Shahin et al.
2013a).
• Ahimastos et al. (2006) found that ramipril 10 mg daily statistically significantly
increased mean maximum walking time (451 seconds, p<0.001) and mean pain-free
walking time (227 seconds, p<0.001) compared with placebo over 24 weeks. Shahin et
al. (2013a) reported walking distance rather than time and found that, compared with

 
placebo, ramipril 10 mg daily statistically significantly improved mean maximum
walking distance (131 m, p=0.001) and mean pain-free walking distance (122 m,
p=0.001) over 24 weeks. Although unclear from the data reported, improvements from
baseline in the studies may be clinically important (see the evidence review section of
this evidence summary for more details).
• Ahimastos et al. (2006) found that ramipril 10 mg daily improved Walking Impairment
Questionnaire distance, speed and stair-climbing scores at 24 weeks compared with
baseline (all p<0.001) but no comparisons with placebo are reported.
• Shahin et al. (2013a) found no statistically significant differences between the groups
in the 3 quality of life measures used in the study (scores (EQ-5D, Short-Form 36
Health Survey [SF-36] and King's College Hospital's vascular quality of life
questionnaire [VascuQoL]).
• According to the summary of product characteristics for Tritace, common adverse
effects of ramipril (seen in between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) include headache,
dizziness, cough, sinusitis, dyspnoea, gastrointestinal disturbances, rash, muscle
spasms, myalgia, hyperkalaemia, hypotension, syncope, chest pain and fatigue. Renal
function should be assessed before and during ramipril treatment, particularly in
people with renal impairment.
• No adverse effects were reported the study by Ahimastos et al. (2006). In Shahin et al.
(2013a), the adverse effect most often reported with ramipril was cough, which led to
discontinuation in some cases.
• The 2 studies were small (n=33 and n=40), affecting their statistical power to detect
differences between the groups. Participants had stable intermittent claudication that
limited their mobility and exercise tolerance, and stable concurrent medical therapies.
The results may not be generalisable to people with less severe intermittent
claudication or comorbid conditions (for example, concomitant disease limiting
walking, including coronary artery disease, or renal impairment). Most of the
participants in the studies were white and it is known that ACE inhibitors are less
effective for treating hypertension in people of African or Caribbean family origin;
therefore, the studies of intermittent claudication may not apply to this population. The
treatment period was 24 weeks and it is not known whether benefits will be
maintained in the longer term. It is also not known how ramipril compares with other
treatments for intermittent claudication because the studies were placebo controlled.
Full text of evidence review.

 
Context and estimated impact for the NHS
The cost of 28 days' treatment with ramipril 10 mg is £1.28 for capsules, £1.32 for tablets
and £358.40 for 2.5 mg/5 ml oral solution (Drug Tariff, October 2015).
Full text of context and estimated impact for the NHS.
Information for the public
A plain English summary is available on the NICE website. This sets out the main points
from the evidence summary in non-technical language and may be especially helpful for
people with peripheral arterial disease who are thinking about trying ramipril.
About this evidence summary
'Evidence summaries: unlicensed or off-label medicines' summarise the published
evidence for selected unlicensed or off-label medicines that are considered to be of
significance to the NHS, where there are no clinically appropriate licensed alternatives.
The summaries provide information for clinicians and patients to inform their
decision-making and support the construction and updating of local formularies.
The summaries support decision-making on the use of an unlicensed or off-label
medicine for an individual patient, where there are good clinical reasons for its use,
usually when there is no licensed medicine for the condition requiring treatment, or
the licensed medicine is not appropriate for that individual.
The strengths and weaknesses of the relevant evidence are critically reviewed within
this summary, but this summary is not NICE guidance.
Full evidence summary
Introduction and current guidance
Peripheral arterial disease, also known as peripheral vascular disease, is a condition in
which arteries that carry blood to the legs (or less commonly the arms) are narrowed or
blocked. The usual cause of peripheral arterial disease is atherosclerosis (Cilostazol,
naftidrofuryl oxalate, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate for the treatment of intermittent
claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease NICE technology appraisal 223).

 
The NICE guideline on lower limb peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis and management
highlights that the condition is a marker for increased risk of cardiovascular events even
when it is asymptomatic. The most common initial symptom of peripheral arterial disease
is pain in the legs while walking, which is relieved by rest, known as intermittent
claudication. When circulation is severely reduced, critical limb ischaemia occurs,
characterised by ischaemic pain at rest, ulceration, tissue loss and gangrene.
The incidence of peripheral arterial disease increases with age. Population studies have
found that about 20% of people aged over 60 years have some degree of peripheral
arterial disease. Incidence is high in people who smoke, people with diabetes and people
with coronary artery disease. In most people with intermittent claudication the symptoms
remain stable, but approximately 20% will develop increasingly severe symptoms, of whom
some will develop critical limb ischaemia.
Mild intermittent claudication is generally managed in primary care: referral to secondary
care is usually reserved for people whose symptoms do not resolve or deteriorate, or are
disabling. Treatment options for intermittent claudication include management of
cardiovascular risk factors (for example, smoking, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, using
antiplatelet drugs and statins), supervised exercise and vasoactive drug treatment
(naftidrofuryl oxalate).
People with severe and disabling intermittent claudication that is inadequately controlled
by the above treatments are often referred to secondary care for consideration of
endovascular treatment (such as angioplasty and stenting) and bypass surgery.
NICE technology appraisal guidance on cilostazol, naftidrofuryl oxalate, pentoxifylline and
inositol nicotinate for the treatment of intermittent claudication in people with peripheral
arterial disease recommends naftidrofuryl oxalate as an option for treating intermittent
claudication in people for whom vasodilator therapy is considered appropriate after taking
into account other treatment options. Cilostazol, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate are
not recommended. The NICE guideline on lower limb peripheral arterial disease: diagnosis
and management advises that naftidrofuryl oxalate should be considered only when
supervised exercise has not led to satisfactory improvement and the person prefers not to
be referred for consideration of angioplasty or bypass surgery. Progress should be
reviewed after 3 to 6 months and treatment discontinued if there has been no
symptomatic benefit.
For more information on the management of peripheral arterial disease, see the NICE

 
clinical knowledge summary on peripheral arterial disease and the NICE pathway on lower
limb peripheral arterial disease.
This evidence summary considers the evidence for using ramipril to treat the symptoms of
peripheral arterial disease (intermittent claudication), rather than for reducing
cardiovascular risk in people with peripheral arterial disease.
Product overview
Drug action
Ramipril is an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE inhibitor), which causes
vasodilation by inhibiting the conversion of angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictor
angiotensin II, and preventing the breakdown of the vasodilator bradykinin (see the
summary of product characteristics for Tritace).
Regulatory status
Ramipril is licensed for treating hypertension, renal disease and symptomatic heart failure.
It is also licensed for the secondary prevention of acute myocardial infarction, and the
reduction of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in people with manifest
atherothrombotic cardiovascular disease (including peripheral arterial disease) or diabetes
with at least one cardiovascular risk factor. See the summary of product characteristics for
Tritace for more information.
The use of ramipril to treat symptoms of peripheral arterial disease is off-label.
In line with the guidance from the General Medical Council (GMC), it is the responsibility of
the prescriber to determine the clinical need of the patient and the suitability of using
ramipril outside its authorised indications.
Cost
The usual dose of ramipril for licensed indications is 1.25 mg daily to 10 mg daily. For this
dose range, the cost of ramipril tablets and capsules is between £1.07 and £1.33 for 28.
Ramipril 2.5 mg/5 ml oral solution costs £96.00 for 150 ml (Drug Tariff, October 2015).

 
Evidence review
This evidence summary discusses 2 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated
ramipril for treating intermittent claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease.
A third RCT (Ahimastos et al. 2013, n=212) was originally included in this evidence
summary but has now been removed. This follows a statement published in the Journal of
the American Medical Association (JAMA), which advised that the RCT has been retracted
after the lead author, Anna Ahimastos, admitted to fabricating the results of this and a
related study. This author was also the lead author for another RCT included in this
evidence summary and it is unclear whether the integrity of that study is also affected.
However, because of the paucity of evidence, the decision has been taken to present the
results, with the proviso that the data may not be robust.
The results of a meta-analysis by Shahin et al. (2013b) have also been removed from the
evidence summary because they were primarily based on the RCT by Ahimastos et al.
(2013). However, some background data on the studies that are still included was obtained
from the meta-analysis and is still referenced within the document.
Ahimastos et al. (2006) and Shahin et al. (2013a)
• Design: Both studies were randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials.
• Patients: The study by Ahimastos et al. (2006) was undertaken in Australia and
included 40 people. Shahin et al. (2013a) was undertaken in the UK and included
33 people. Participants in both studies had stable intermittent claudication for
6 months (which limited their mobility and exercise tolerance), an ankle brachial
pressure index (ABPI, a measure of the severity of peripheral arterial disease) of less
than 0.9 at rest, blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg or less, and no concomitant disease
limiting walking (including coronary artery disease), renal impairment or ACE inhibitor
or angiotensin receptor blocker treatment. Participants in Ahimastos et al. (2006) had
no history of diabetes or hypertension. See table 1 for more information on baseline
characteristics.
• Intervention and comparison: In the study by Ahimastos et al. (2006), participants
were randomised to receive ramipril 10 mg daily or placebo for 24 weeks, and were
asked to maintain their lifestyle throughout the trial. Baseline characteristics were
reported to be similar between the groups. In Shahin et al. (2013a), participants were
randomised to receive ramipril 5 mg daily or placebo for 2 weeks, followed by 10 mg

 
daily or placebo for 22 weeks. In this study, the majority of baseline characteristics
were similar between the groups. The methods of randomisation used suggest
allocation was concealed in both studies.
• Outcomes: In Ahimastos et al. (2006), outcomes were assessed before and after
treatment and included maximum and pain-free walking times (treadmill speed 3.2 km/
hour, incline 12%), Walking Impairment Questionnaire scores (WIQ, an assessment of
walking distance, speed and stair-climbing ability in peripheral arterial disease, scored
from 0−100 with higher scores indicating fewer symptoms and greater functional
capacity) and adverse events. From the information on statistical powering of the
study, the primary outcome is assumed to be change in maximum walking time,
although this is not specified in the paper. Participants in Shahin et al. (2013a) were
followed up at weeks 2, 6 and 24. Outcomes included treadmill maximum and
pain-free walking distances (treadmill speed 2.5 km/hour, incline 10%), quality of life
scores (EQ-5D, Short-Form 36 Health Survey [SF-36], King's College Hospital's
vascular quality of life questionnaire [VascuQoL]) and adverse events. From the
information on powering of this study, the primary outcome is assumed to be change
in maximum walking distance, although this is not specified in the paper. ABPI was
also assessed in the studies but is not discussed in this evidence summary because it
is a disease orientated outcome and has limited applicability to practice.
Table 1 Baseline characteristics of study participants
Ahimastos et al. (2006) Shahin et al. (2013a)
Mean age 66 years 64 years
Male 38/40 (95%) 25/33 (76%)
Mean ABPI 0.56 0.63a
Mean BMI 24 kg/m2 28 kg/m2
Mean blood pressure 139/85 mmHga 143/80 mmHga
Mean maximum walking 239 seconds Not reported
time
Median maximum walking Not reported 140 metres
distance
Current smokers 17/40 (42.5%) 16/33 (48.5%)

 
Diabetes mellitus Excluded 11/33 (33%)
Hypertension Excluded 20/33 (61%)
Medications Aspirin 9/40 (22.5%) Antiplatelet drugs 31/33
(94%)
Lipid-lowering drugs 11/40
(27.5%) Lipid-modifying drugs 28/
33 (85%)
Abbreviations: ABPI, ankle brachial pressure index; BMI, body mass index
a Information obtained from Shahin et al. (2013b)
Table 2 Summary of results for Ahimastos et al. (2006) and Shahin
et al. (2013a)
Placebo Ramipril Analysis
10 mg
Randomised Ahimastos n=20 n=20
et al.
(2006)
Shahin et n=19 n=14
al.
(2013a)
Efficacy Ahimastos n=20 n=20
et al.
(2006)
Shahin et n=17 n=12
al.
(2013a)a
Primary outcome 1: Ahimastos −10 seconds 441 seconds Difference
change in mean et al. 451 seconds
maximum walking (2006)
95% CI 367 seconds to
time at 24 weeks
536 seconds
p<0.001

 
Primary outcome 2: Shahin et Not Not Difference 131 m
change in mean al. reported reported
95% CI 62 m to 199 m
maximum walking (2013a)
p=0.001
distance at
24 weeksb
Selected secondary outcomes:
Change in mean Ahimastos Not Not Difference
pain-free walking et al. reported reported 227 seconds
time at 24 weeks (2006)
95% CI 175 seconds to
278 seconds
p<0.001
Change in mean Shahin et Not Not Difference 122 m
pain-free walking al. reported reported
95% CI 56 m to 188 m
distance at (2013a)
p=0.001
24 weeksb
Change in median Ahimastos Not 16% Comparison with
WIQ distance score et al. reported p<0.001c placebo not reported
at 24 weeks (2006)
Change in median Ahimastos Not 15% Comparison with
WIQ speed score at et al. reported p<0.001c placebo not reported
24 weeks (2006)
Change in median Ahimastos Not 50% Comparison with
WIQ stair climbing et al. reported p<0.001c placebo not reported
score at 24 weeks (2006)
Quality of life at Shahin et No significant
24 weeksb al. differences between
(2013a) the groups in SF-36,
EQ-5D or VascuQoL
scores
Safety Ahimastos n=20 n=20
et al.
(2006)

 
Shahin et n=17 n=12
al.
(2013a)
Patients reporting Ahimastos None None
adverse events et al.
(2006)
Shahin et 2/19 (10.5%) 4/14 (28.6%) No statistical analyses
al. withdrew reported reported
(2013a) giving no cough
reason
1/14 (7.1%)
reported
dizziness
2/14 (14.3%)
withdrew
with cough
or dizziness
Abbreviations: ABPI, ankle brachial pressure index; CI, confidence interval; p, p value;
SF-36, Short-Form 36 Health Survey; VascuQoL, King's College Hospital's vascular
quality of life questionnaire; WIQ, Walking Impairment Questionnaire
a 2 people were lost to follow-up in each group and were not included in analyses
b Comparisons in Shahin et al. (2013a) are from 2 weeks to 24 weeks, not baseline to
24 weeks, because participants received a lower dose of ramipril (or placebo) for a
2-week run-in period
c p value is for change from baseline
Clinical effectiveness
Ahimastos et al. (2006) (n=40) found that, in people with intermittent claudication, ramipril
10 mg daily statistically significantly increased mean maximum walking time (451 seconds,
p<0.001) and mean pain-free walking time (227 seconds, p<0.001) compared with placebo
over 24 weeks. It is unclear whether these improvements are clinically important. However,
in the ramipril groups, the mean maximum walking time approximately tripled in Ahimastos
et al. (2006) (from 234 seconds to 675 seconds) compared with baseline, which may be
considered a relevant improvement by patients.

 
Shahin et al. (2013a) (n=33) reported walking distance rather than time and found that,
compared with placebo, ramipril 10 mg daily statistically significantly improved mean
maximum walking distance (131 m, p=0.001) and mean pain-free walking distance (122 m,
p=0.001) over 24 weeks. According to the full NICE guideline on peripheral arterial
disease, the minimum clinically important difference is a doubling in baseline values for
mean maximum walking distance and pain-free walking distance. Although the complete
data are not reported by Shahin et al. (2013a), at baseline median maximum walking
distance was 137 m and pain-free walking distance was 81 m, and improvements in these
outcomes at 24 weeks are reported to be statistically significant compared with 2 weeks
and 6 weeks (p=0.006 and p=0.010 respectively for maximum walking distance and
p=0.020 and p=0.042 respectively for pain-free walking distance).
Ahimastos et al. (2006) found that ramipril 10 mg daily improved WIQ distance, speed and
stair-climbing scores at 24 weeks compared with baseline (all p<0.001) but no
comparisons with placebo are reported.
Shahin et al. (2013a) found no significant differences between the groups in the 3 quality
of life measures used in the study (EQ-5D, SF-36 and VascuQoL).
Safety and tolerability
No adverse events were reported in participants in Ahimastos et al. (2006) (n=40) and
follow-up was complete.
In the run-in phase of the study by Shahin et al. (2013a), 4/38 people withdrew because of
cough and 1/38 withdrew because of headache. Of the 14 people randomised to receive
ramipril, 1 experienced hyperkalaemia (which resolved without complications), 4
experienced cough and 1 experienced dizziness. The person with dizziness and 1 person
with cough withdrew from the study. Of the 19 people randomised to receive placebo, 2
withdrew without giving a reason.
According to the summary of product characteristics for Tritace, common adverse effects
of ramipril (seen in between 1 in 10 and 1 in 100 people) include headache, dizziness,
cough, sinusitis, dyspnoea, gastrointestinal disturbances, rash, muscle spasms, myalgia,
hyperkalaemia, hypotension, syncope, chest pain and fatigue. Serious adverse effects
include angioedema, hyperkalaemia, renal or hepatic impairment, pancreatitis, severe skin
reactions and neutropenia/agranulocytosis. Renal function should be assessed before and
during ramipril treatment, particularly in people with renal impairment.

 
Evidence strengths and limitations
The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation study showed that ramipril has beneficial
effects on morbidity and mortality and it is licensed for the reduction of cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality in patients with manifest atherothrombotic cardiovascular disease
(including peripheral arterial disease). The 2 small RCTs by Ahimastos et al. (2006) and
Shahin et al. (2013a) suggest that ramipril 10 mg daily also improves treadmill walking
ability (maximum walking and pain free walking) in people with intermittent claudication
over 24 weeks and the improvements appear to be clinically important. This is supported
by improvements in WIQ distance, speed and stair-climbing scores in Ahimastos et al.
(2006), which may be more representative of activities of daily living than treadmill tests.
However, the WIQ is a measure of walking impairment generally, not just that due to
intermittent claudication, and Ahimastos et al. (2006) state that the WIQ has restricted
capacity to discriminate between people with poor exercise tolerance. In addition, the
studies have other limitations.
Clinical specialists involved in the development of the NICE technology appraisal
considered that neither ABPI or pain-free walking distance were clinically relevant
outcome measures because ABPI is used in clinical practice only as a diagnostic tool for
peripheral arterial disease, and pain-free walking distance can be difficult to assess
without using a fixed-speed treadmill because patients usually adjust the speed of their
walking to avoid pain and to maximise walking distance. Treadmill testing is unlikely to be
offered in the course of routine clinical practice. In addition, the clinical specialists agreed
that maximum walking distance was the most suitable outcome measure. One of the
specialists involved in the production of this evidence summary considered that walking
times (used in Ahimastos et al. 2006) are of little value in assessing clinical impact of
treatments for intermittent claudication. In addition, walking distance should be supported
by a quality of life measure because a small increase in walking distance may not affect a
person's quality of life. Shahin et al. (2013a) found no differences between the groups in
3 quality of life measures.
The 2 studies were small (n=33 and n=40), affecting their power to detect differences
between the groups. Participants had stable intermittent claudication that limited their
mobility and exercise tolerance, and stable concurrent medical therapies. The results may
not be generalisable to people with less severe intermittent claudication or comorbid
conditions (for example, concomitant disease limiting walking, including coronary artery
disease, or renal impairment). Participants in Ahimastos et al. (2006) had no history of
diabetes or hypertension. A higher proportion of participants in Shahin et al. (2013a) had

 
hypertension or diabetes mellitus and took antiplatelet and lipid-lowering drugs than in the
other study.
Most of the participants in the studies were white and male (average age about 65 years)
and around 40% were smokers. It is known that ACE inhibitors are less effective for
treating some hypertension in people of African or Caribbean family origin; therefore, the
studies on intermittent claudication may not apply to this population.
Ramipril has not been compared directly with other treatments for intermittent
claudication. Also, the dose of ramipril used in the 2 RCTs was the maximum licensed dose
(10 mg) and it is not known whether lower doses would also improve intermittent
claudication. The treatment period was 24 weeks and it is unclear whether benefits will be
maintained in the longer term.
Overall, specialists involved in the production of this evidence summary consider that the
improvements in walking seen with ramipril in the studies may be clinically relevant.
However, they stress that higher quality evidence is needed before recommendations can
be made about when it should be used. In line with the NICE technology appraisal
guidance on cilostazol, naftidrofuryl oxalate, pentoxifylline and inositol nicotinate for the
treatment of intermittent claudication in people with peripheral arterial disease, vasoactive
drugs are now used infrequently for intermittent claudication. Off-label drugs should only
be considered when there are good clinical reasons to do so, usually when there is no
licensed medicine for the condition requiring treatment, or the licensed medicine is not
appropriate for that individual. Therefore, the place in therapy of ramipril is likely to be very
limited. One of the specialists considered that, if a trial of ramipril treatment is considered
appropriate, it should be discontinued after 3 months if there is no benefit.
Context and estimated impact for the NHS
Cost effectiveness
No cost-effectiveness studies were identified that compared ramipril with other
treatments or placebo for managing symptoms of peripheral arterial disease.
Costs of 28 days' treatment with ramipril 10 mg daily, the dose used in the studies, are
shown in table 3.

 
Table 3 Costs of ramipril treatment
Cost (excluding VAT; Drug Cost (excluding VAT) of 28 days'
Tariff, October 2015) treatment at 10 mg daily
10 mg capsules £1.28 for 28 £1.28
10 mg tablets £1.33 for 28 £1.33
2.5 mg/5 ml oral £96.00 for 150 ml £358.40
solution sugar free
Current drug usage
No information on the use of ramipril for treating symptoms of peripheral arterial disease in
UK clinical practice was identified.
The NHS prescription cost analysis for England 2014 reports that 26 million community
prescriptions for ramipril were dispensed in 2014, costing £40 million (net ingredient cost).
The indications for these prescriptions are not provided but it is likely that most will have
been for licensed indications. In addition, these data do not include hospital prescriptions.