Temperature control to improve neurological outcomes after cardiac arrest
1 Recommendations
To prevent fever
1.1 Use temperature control as an option to prevent fever and improve neurological
outcomes after cardiac arrest with standard arrangements in place for clinical
governance, consent and audit.
1.2 For auditing the outcomes of this procedure, the main efficacy and safety
outcomes identified in this guidance can be entered into NICE's interventional
procedure outcomes audit tool (for use at local discretion).
To induce therapeutic hypothermia
1.3 More research is needed on temperature control to induce therapeutic
hypothermia (a temperature of less than 36°C) to improve neurological outcomes
after cardiac arrest.
1.4 This procedure should only be done as part of a formal research study and a
research ethics committee needs to have approved its use.
1.5 More research, in the form of randomised controlled trials, is needed on:
• patient selection

 
• timing of the intervention
• degree and duration of temperature control
• neurological outcomes
• survival.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Clinical trial evidence suggests that, if core body temperature is controlled to prevent fever
after cardiac arrest, there may be improved neurological outcomes (less brain injury).
There are no safety concerns with fever prevention. So, it can be used with standard
arrangements. But more research is needed on whether the improved neurological
outcomes are directly related to the procedure.
Some clinical trial evidence suggests that there is less brain injury when the body's core
temperature is cooled to below 36°C (therapeutic hypothermia) after cardiac arrest. But
other clinical trial evidence suggests that there is no reduction in brain injury. In some
trials, the procedure was delayed. So, the importance of how long after cardiac arrest
cooling is started is uncertain.
Evidence on the safety of therapeutic hypothermia suggests that it is potentially harmful.
People who have this procedure are also more likely to have an abnormal heart rhythm.
More research is needed on safety and long-term outcomes of therapeutic hypothermia
after cardiac arrest, so it should be used only in research.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Cardiac arrest is when normal blood circulation suddenly stops because the heart
fails to contract effectively. The underlying abnormal cardiac rhythms most
commonly associated with cardiac arrest are:

 
• ventricular fibrillation (VF)
• asystole
• pulseless electrical activity
• pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Cardiac arrest leads to loss of consciousness, respiratory failure and,
ultimately, death.
Current treatments
2.2 Treatment for cardiac arrest includes immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation to
restore the circulation and prevent subsequent brain injury. Defibrillation may be
used to treat VF and pulseless VT rhythms. Standard care may also include
mechanical ventilation and drugs such as adrenaline and amiodarone.
Resuscitation Council UK's 2021 resuscitation guidelines contain guidance on
basic and advanced life support.
The procedure
2.3 After cardiac arrest, people in a coma who have a return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC) can have their core body temperature actively controlled. This
is done to:
• prevent fever (by maintaining a core temperature between 36.5°C and
37.5°C), or
• induce therapeutic hypothermia (by cooling to a core temperature typically
between 32°C and 36°C).
2.4 The aim is to reduce brain injury and improve neurological outcomes. The exact
mechanism by which cooling may protect against brain injury is unclear. Possible
mechanisms include reductions in metabolic demand, release of excitatory
neurotransmitters and inflammation after ischaemia.

 
2.5 Temperature control is done using either:
• surface techniques (for example, heat exchange cooling pads, cooling
blankets and ice packs), or
• internal techniques (for example, an endovascular cooling device).
Core body temperature is monitored using a temperature probe (such as a
bladder, rectal or nasopharyngeal temperature probe) and is controlled to a
preset point determined by the clinician.
2.6 If therapeutic hypothermia is induced, controlled rewarming is usually done over
several hours. In addition, people who have had cardiac arrest generally have
standard critical care measures, and may need intravenous sedation and muscle
relaxants, to prevent shivering.
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 9 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included 8 systematic reviews and meta-analyses and
1 randomised controlled trial (RCT). It is presented in the summary of key
evidence section in the interventional procedures overview. Other relevant
literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.2 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be:
• survival
• reduction in long-term neurological disability
• independent living

 
• quality of life
• reduction in length of critical care and hospital stay.
3.3 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be:
• arrhythmias
• shivering
• pneumonia
• sepsis
• skin damage.
3.4 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.5 There are several available technologies for controlling temperature after cardiac
arrest.
3.6 Using large volumes of intravenous saline to induce therapeutic hypothermia
before admission to hospital can cause side effects such as pulmonary oedema.
3.7 The committee was informed that additional RCTs comparing temperature control
for fever prevention with no intervention are unlikely to be done.
