=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "therapeutic-hypothermia-for-acute-ischaemic-stroke-pdf-1899874108614085.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:49:23.222666",
  "file_size_bytes": 60787,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/therapeutic-hypothermia-for-acute-ischaemic-stroke-pdf-1899874108614085.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Therapeutic hypothermia for
acute ischaemic stroke
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 29 May 2019
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg647
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 2 ---
Therapeutic hypothermia for acute ischaemic stroke (IPG647)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
1 Recommendations
1.1 Current evidence on the safety of therapeutic hypothermia for acute
ischaemic stroke shows that there are serious complications. Evidence
on efficacy does not show any meaningful improvement in outcomes.
Therefore, this procedure should not be used. Find out why NICE
recommends not to use some procedures on the NICE interventional
procedures guidance page.
2 The condition, current treatments and
procedure
The condition
2.1 Acute ischaemic stroke is characterised by the sudden loss of blood
circulation to an area of the brain and a corresponding loss of
neurological function. This may lead to symptoms such as numbness or
weakness of the face, arm or leg on 1 side of the body, and often
problems with speech and swallowing. Stroke severity can be measured
using scales such as the National Institutes of Health Stroke scale and
the Modified Rankin scale. Broadly, strokes are classified as either
haemorrhagic or ischaemic. Acute ischaemic stroke refers to a stroke
caused by an arterial thrombosis or embolism. It is more common than
haemorrhagic stroke.
Current treatments
2.2 Patients suspected to be having an acute ischaemic stroke should have
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 3 ---
Therapeutic hypothermia for acute ischaemic stroke (IPG647)
rapid assessment and early intervention with specialist care according to
NICE's guideline on stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s.
Recanalisation strategies, such as thrombolysis, attempt to re-establish
blood flow so that cells starved of oxygen can be rescued before they
are irreversibly damaged. Effective stroke care also includes specialised
supportive care and rehabilitation when appropriate.
The procedure
2.3 The timing, duration and degree of therapeutic hypothermia in trials has
varied. Typically, however, cooling has been attempted as close to stroke
onset as possible (usually within 6 hours) and continued for at least 12 to
24 hours, with body temperature maintained at 33°C to 36°C. This
guidance only refers to the use of therapeutic hypothermia and not to
other targeted temperature management approaches that treat or
prevent pyrexia.
2.4 Before the procedure, the patient's temperature is measured and further
temperature monitoring is done continuously with an internal
(intravesical, rectal or oesophageal) probe connected to the cooling
device. Cooling devices can be surface (ice-cold saline, surface cooling,
cooling helmets and nasal cooling) or endovascular systems. After
cooling, the body is slowly rewarmed, at a rate of 0.25°C to 0.5°C every
hour. Rewarming takes about 8 hours. During cooling, patients need
close cardiovascular monitoring in an intensive care environment, and
may also need intubation and sedation. Drugs, including neuromuscular
blockers, may be used to manage shivering.
2.5 The procedure may be used with thrombolysis (intravenous alteplase),
mechanical thrombectomy or other vascular reperfusion techniques.
2.6 The aim of the procedure is to reduce the risk of secondary brain
damage.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 4 ---
Therapeutic hypothermia for acute ischaemic stroke (IPG647)
3 Committee considerations
The evidence
3.1 To inform the committee, NICE did a rapid review of the published
literature on the efficacy and safety of this procedure. This comprised a
comprehensive literature search and detailed review of the evidence
from 9 sources, which was discussed by the committee. The evidence
included 1 systematic review, 3 randomised controlled trials (1 of which
was a conference abstract and used for safety data only), 3 non-
randomised comparative studies and 2 case series. It is presented in
table 2 of the interventional procedures overview. Other relevant
literature is in the appendix of the overview.
3.2 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: reduction in mortality and stroke morbidity, and
improved quality of life.
3.3 The specialist advisers and the committee considered the key safety
outcomes to be: worse neurological outcome, pneumonia and bleeding.
Committee comments
3.4 There are different methods and different devices used for the
procedure.
3.5 There are variations in the degree of temperature control, both in the
degree of cooling and the length of treatment period, and target
temperatures can be difficult to achieve.
3.6 Pneumonia was more common in patients treated with this procedure.
3.7 This procedure should be differentiated from targeted temperature
management more generally, which also includes treatment and
prevention of pyrexia.
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3369-3
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
--- Страница 5 ---
Therapeutic hypothermia for acute ischaemic stroke (IPG647)
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 5
