Ticagrelor for the treatment of acute coronary syndromes
1 Recommendations
1.1 Ticagrelor in combination with low-dose aspirin is recommended for up to
12 months as a treatment option in adults with acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
that is, people:
• with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) – defined as ST
elevation or new left bundle branch block on electrocardiogram – that
cardiologists intend to treat with primary percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) or
• with non-ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) or
• admitted to hospital with unstable angina – defined as ST or T wave changes
on electrocardiogram suggestive of ischaemia plus 1 of the characteristics
defined in section 1.2. Before ticagrelor is continued beyond the initial
treatment, the diagnosis of unstable angina should first be confirmed, ideally
by a cardiologist.
1.2 For the purposes of this guidance, characteristics to be used in defining
treatment with ticagrelor for unstable angina are: age 60 years or older; previous
myocardial infarction or previous coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG);
coronary artery disease with stenosis of 50% or more in at least 2 vessels;
previous ischaemic stroke; previous transient ischaemic attack, carotid stenosis
of at least 50%, or cerebral revascularisation; diabetes mellitus; peripheral arterial
disease; or chronic renal dysfunction, defined as a creatinine clearance of less
than 60 ml per minute per 1.73 m2 of body-surface area.

 
2 The technology
2.1 Ticagrelor (Brilique, AstraZeneca) is an oral antagonist at the P2Y adenosine
12
diphosphate receptor, which inhibits platelet aggregation and thrombus formation
in atherosclerotic disease. The summary of product characteristics (SPC) states
that ticagrelor, co-administered with low-dose aspirin, is indicated for the
prevention of atherothrombotic events in adult patients with ACS, defined as
STEMI, NSTEMI or unstable angina. Patients with ACS who receive ticagrelor and
aspirin may receive drugs only (medical management) or may also undergo
revascularisation with PCI or CABG.
2.2 According to the SPC, treatment should be initiated with a loading dose of 180
mg ticagrelor (2 tablets of 90 mg) and then continued at 90 mg twice a day for up
to 12 months. Patients taking ticagrelor should also take low-dose aspirin daily,
unless specifically contraindicated. Following an initial loading dose of aspirin, the
maintenance dose is 75 to 150 mg per day.
2.3 Ticagrelor is contraindicated in patients with active pathological bleeding, a
history of intracranial haemorrhage, or moderate-to-severe hepatic impairment.
Co-administration of ticagrelor with a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor (for example,
ketoconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir, or atazanavir) is also
contraindicated. The most commonly reported adverse reactions to treatment
with ticagrelor include dyspnoea, epistaxis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage,
subcutaneous or dermal bleeding, and bruising. For full details of adverse effects
and contraindications, see the SPC.
2.4 The manufacturer stated in its submission that the cost of 90 mg tablets of
ticagrelor is £54.60 for a pack of 56 tablets (28 days). Costs may vary in different
settings because of procurement discounts.

 
3 The manufacturer's submission
The Appraisal Committee considered evidence submitted by the manufacturer of
ticagrelor and a review of this submission by the Evidence Review Group (ERG). This
evidence related to the clinical and cost effectiveness of ticagrelor plus aspirin.
Clinical effectiveness
3.1 For the comparison of ticagrelor plus aspirin with clopidogrel plus aspirin, the
manufacturer identified 1 trial, the PLATO trial, an international, multicentre,
randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, parallel group, phase 3 study. The trial
evaluated the efficacy and safety of ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with
clopidogrel plus aspirin over 12 months in people with ACS whose symptoms
began up to 24 hours before their admission to hospital. In the trial, 18,624 adult
patients with ACS with or without ST-segment elevation on electrocardiogram
from 43 countries including 18 UK centres (n=281) were admitted to hospital, and
randomised to either ticagrelor plus aspirin (n=9,333) or clopidogrel plus aspirin
(n=9,291). In the ticagrelor group, patients received a loading dose of 180 mg of
ticagrelor, then 90 mg twice a day. Patients randomised to clopidogrel received
loading doses of 300 to 600 mg of clopidogrel, then 75 mg every day thereafter.
Patients did not need loading doses of clopidogrel if they had taken clopidogrel
before admission or had received clopidogrel after admission but before
randomisation (median approximately 5 hours). In the time between admission
and randomisation, 46% of patients in both the ticagrelor and clopidogrel groups
received clopidogrel. All patients also received aspirin (in addition to ticagrelor or
clopidogrel) with a loading dose of 325 mg, then 75 to 100 mg daily. Patients
already taking aspirin did not need a loading dose of aspirin.
3.2 The primary end point was time to first event (a composite of myocardial
infarction, stroke or death from vascular causes). The planned duration of
treatment and follow-up was 12 months. If before this time 1,780 individuals had a
primary end point event, then patients who had not yet been followed for
12 months would finish the study at their 6 or 9-month visit. At the end of the
trial, 1,878 participants had experienced events, and the median duration of
treatment was 9.1 months. Secondary end points included: myocardial infarction;

 
stroke; death from vascular causes; death from any cause; a composite of
myocardial infarction, stroke and death from any cause; and a composite of
myocardial infarction, stroke, severe recurrent cardiac ischaemia, recurrent
cardiac ischaemia, transient ischaemic attack, other arterial thrombotic events
and death from vascular causes.
3.3 The results showed that the relative risk of experiencing a primary end point
event was 16% lower in the ticagrelor group compared with the clopidogrel group
(hazard ratio [HR] 0.84; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.77 to 0.92; p<0.001). Of
the components of the primary end point, randomisation to ticagrelor plus aspirin
reduced the incidence of myocardial infarction (HR 0.84; 95% CI 0.75 to 0.95;
p=0.005) and death from vascular causes (HR 0.79; 95% CI 0.69 to 0.91;
p=0.001), but not of stroke (HR 1.17; 95% CI 0.91 to 1.52). Randomisation to
ticagrelor plus aspirin reduced the absolute risk of experiencing the primary end
point from 11.7% to 9.8% at 12 months (absolute risk reduction 1.9%) compared
with clopidogrel plus aspirin.
3.4 The manufacturer explored the consistency of effects and safety end points in 25
pre-specified subgroups and 8 post-hoc subgroups. An analysis was conducted
of the primary end point in several predefined subgroups. The manufacturer's
submission stated that analyses showed statistically significant differences in
treatment efficacy in 3 groups: geographic region; body weight above or below a
gender-specific median; and use of lipid-lowering drugs at randomisation. The
HRs by type of ACS at presentation – unstable angina, NSTEMI and STEMI – were
0.96 (95% CI 0.75 to 1.22), 0.83 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.94) and 0.84 (95% CI 0.72 to
0.98) respectively with a non-statistically significant test for interaction (p=0.41).
The manufacturer presented 6 analyses in subgroups that included patients
whose condition was managed invasively, managed medically, patients with
STEMI, patients with diabetes, patients with genetic polymorphisms, and patients
undergoing CABG. The results of these 6 subgroup analyses were generally
consistent with the primary analysis.
3.5 The manufacturer reported adverse events from the PLATO study, specifically
bleeding, dyspnoea and ventricular pauses. There was no statistically significant
difference in the primary safety end point of 'major' bleeding between the
ticagrelor plus aspirin and clopidogrel plus aspirin groups (11.6% versus 11.2%
respectively; p=0.43), or in the end point of bleeding defined by the Thrombolysis

 
in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) scale. Both were analysed according to which
treatment a patient took, rather than to which a patient had been randomised;
these findings were consistent across all major subgroups. Patients randomised
to ticagrelor experienced more overall major and minor bleeding (HR 1.11; 95% CI
1.03 to 1.20; p=0.008) as well as more major bleeding not related to CABG (HR
1.19; 95% CI 1.02 to 1.38; p=0.03). Intracranial bleeding was more common in the
ticagrelor plus aspirin group than in the clopidogrel plus aspirin group, with fatal
intracranial bleeding statistically significantly more common in the ticagrelor plus
aspirin group (HR not reported; p=0.02). Fatal bleeding excluding intracranial
bleeding was statistically significantly more common in the clopidogrel plus
aspirin group (HR not reported; p=0.03). There was no difference between the 2
groups in relation to overall fatal bleeding (0.3% in each group). Patients
randomised to ticagrelor experienced dyspnoea statistically significantly more
often than patients taking clopidogrel (13.8% versus 7.8% respectively; p<0.001).
More patients taking ticagrelor plus aspirin discontinued treatment because of
dyspnoea than patients taking clopidogrel plus aspirin (0.9% versus 0.1%
respectively; p<0.001). Holter monitoring detected more ventricular pauses of
3 seconds or longer during the first week in the ticagrelor plus aspirin group than
in the clopidogrel plus aspirin group, but these occurred infrequently at 30 days
of treatment and were rarely associated with symptoms. Patients treated with
ticagrelor had statistically significantly greater increases from baseline in levels of
serum uric acid and serum creatinine compared with those on clopidogrel
(p<0.001 for both events throughout the study).
3.6 The manufacturer identified no trials directly comparing ticagrelor plus aspirin
with prasugrel plus aspirin. Instead, the manufacturer identified 2 trials comparing
prasugrel plus aspirin with clopidogrel plus aspirin that provided data for an
indirect comparison: the PLATO trial (ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with
clopidogrel plus aspirin) and TRITON-TIMI 38, which compared prasugrel plus
aspirin with clopidogrel plus aspirin in patients (n=13,608) with ACS and
scheduled PCI. The manufacturer took the view that the trials were not
comparable and, by inference, a comparison between prasugrel and ticagrelor
based on these trials was inappropriate and should be viewed with caution. The
manufacturer noted that the PLATO and TRITON-TIMI 38 trials were similar in
many ways, both including populations with ACS, both comparing the
intervention plus aspirin to clopidogrel plus aspirin, and both sharing the same
primary end point. However, there were important differences in the use of PCI

 
and medical management, in the size and timing of the loading dose of
clopidogrel, and in assessing myocardial infarction. Although the manufacturer
considered the indirect comparison inappropriate, it cited a published paper
based on the PLATO and TRITON-TIMI 38 trials that showed no statistically
significant differences in the occurrence of myocardial infarction, stroke, death
from any cause or the composite of these outcomes between the 2 drugs.
Ticagrelor plus aspirin was associated with a statistically significantly lower risk
of major bleeding and major bleeding specifically associated with bypass grafting
than prasugrel plus aspirin. The risk of major bleeding not related to CABG did not
differ between patients taking prasugrel and those taking ticagrelor.
3.7 The PLATO trial included a pre-specified sub-study of health economics and
quality of life that evaluated the health-related quality of life for ticagrelor plus
aspirin compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin. Investigators administered the
EuroQual 5D (EQ-5D) questionnaire to 8,840 patients at discharge from hospital
for the index ACS event, again at 6 months, and at the end of treatment in all
countries where a version of EQ-5D in the country's official language was
available. No differences in any of the items on the EQ-5D were found between
the ticagrelor plus aspirin group and the clopidogrel plus aspirin group.
Cost effectiveness
3.8 The manufacturer did not identify any publications that evaluated the cost
effectiveness of ticagrelor for the treatment of ACS. The manufacturer developed
a new economic model, informed by 9 existing economic evaluations. For the
health economics evaluation of ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with prasugrel
plus aspirin, the manufacturer presented the results of a published indirect
comparison of the TRITON-TIMI 38 trial and the PLATO trial, conducted by an
independent group.
3.9 The manufacturer constructed a 2-part cost−utility model with a 1-year decision
tree to model effectiveness based on data from the PLATO study, and a Markov
model to extrapolate costs and benefits to a lifetime horizon (40 years), and to
incorporate major clinical events. Patients in the model had ACS (STEMI, NSTEMI
or unstable angina) and included patients whose condition was managed
medically or with PCI or CABG; the model therefore reflected the marketing

 
authorisation for ticagrelor. The model compared ticagrelor plus aspirin with
clopidogrel plus aspirin.
3.10 The 1-year decision tree contained 4 mutually exclusive health states: non-fatal
myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, death from any cause, and no further
event. The Markov model included 6 states: non-fatal myocardial infarction, post-
myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, post-stroke, death, and no further event.
Non-fatal myocardial infarction and non-fatal stroke were tunnel states, which
allowed for a worse prognosis the first year after a non-fatal event compared with
second and subsequent years. After the first year following a non-fatal event,
patients proceeded to 1 of 4 mutually exclusive health states: post-myocardial
infarction, post-stroke, death or no further event. Costs and health outcomes
were discounted at 3.5%. The Markov model used a half-cycle correction to
adjust for simulated costs and outcomes. The model did not permit a patient to
discontinue treatment for any reason other than death.
3.11 In the model, costs, life years, and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) accrued
beyond the first year of treatment with ticagrelor or clopidogrel; however, the
model assumed that the beneficial effect of ticagrelor does not persist beyond
1 year. This means that the transition probabilities between states in the Markov
model were the same for both treatment arms; the only difference between
treatment arms was the number of patients who started the Markov model in
each state, which was based on the output of the 1-year decision tree. Adverse
events (notably bleeding) were not included in the structure of the model, but the
increased costs and decreased health-related quality of life associated with
adverse events recorded in PLATO (as part of PLATO-HECON) were included in
the first year (decision tree) of the model. The manufacturer assumed that
adverse events including bleeding and dyspnoea have no lasting effects beyond
the 12-month duration of the trial. To model the incidence of cardiovascular
complications beyond 1 year (in the Markov component of the model), the
manufacturer assumed a constant probability of 3.15% per year for non-fatal
myocardial infarction and 1.02% per year for non-fatal stroke. The risk of death
from MI after the index event (STEMI, NSTEMI or unstable angina) was assumed
to be the same as that of death at least 1 year after the index ACS event.
3.12 For the 1-year decision tree, the manufacturer used a parametric time-to-event
survival model with a Weibull distribution to determine the baseline risk (that is,

 
the risk of cardiovascular events and death in the clopidogrel group). The
manufacturer then applied HRs reflective of the effectiveness of ticagrelor from
the PLATO study to this baseline risk to determine the risk in patients taking
ticagrelor. Using data in the 1-year decision tree derived from the PLATO study,
the manufacturer estimated from patients in the clopidogrel group age-adjusted
event rates (myocardial infarction, stroke, death from any cause and death from
vascular causes) for a UK population with ACS (mean age of PLATO patients,
62.2 years; reported age of UK patients with ACS in 2009 to 2010, 69.7 years). In
the Markov model, the transition probabilities from the no event health state to
each of the non-fatal myocardial infarction or non-fatal stroke health states were
estimated from a study that the manufacturer commissioned from the Myocardial
Ischaemia National Audit Project and the General Practice Research Database.
The probabilities of transitioning between all other health states were based on
relative risks applied to the probability of death in standard life tables.
3.13 The manufacturer used the 12-month cohort (patients who were eligible for a
12-month follow-up) in the PLATO-HECON study to calculate the utility accrued
in the study and reported it as the average utility value for a patient over the
12-month period using the EQ-5D. The manufacturer performed a literature
search to assess the relationship between utility values in the PLATO study and in
the literature. The lower values from the literature were used in sensitivity
analyses. The utility scores from both the PLATO-HECON substudy and the
literature were adjusted downwards by 0.0328 to better reflect the patient
population that would be treated in UK clinical practice. In addition, because
utility decreases with age, the manufacturer applied a utility decrement of 0.004
in the Markov model to each cycle beyond the first year.
3.14 The costs for the generic drugs clopidogrel and aspirin were taken from the NHS
Drug Tariff, November 2010. The cost of the drugs used in the economic
evaluation were: aspirin 28-pack, £0.82; clopidogrel 30-pack, £3.40; and
ticagrelor 28-pack, £54.60. The PLATO-HECON substudy measured resource use
and determined costs for all patients participating in the PLATO study by
recording admissions to hospital, interventions, investigations, blood products,
re-operations due to bleeding, and use of concomitant or study drugs to estimate
total healthcare costs associated with ticagrelor and clopidogrel. Resource use
included costs from randomisation to the time of discharge from hospital, as well
as after discharge from hospital to the end of the PLATO study. The manufacturer

 
also included in sensitivity analyses the costs of a visit to the GP and of a blood
test to check renal function, as stipulated in the SPC for ticagrelor.
3.15 In its deterministic base case (40-year time horizon), the manufacturer's model
estimated that ticagrelor provides an incremental health gain of 0.108 QALYs
compared with clopidogrel, at an incremental cost of £379, resulting in an
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of £3,521 per QALY gained. The
manufacturer also presented results using time horizons of 1 year, 5 years,
10 years and 20 years: the ICER differed substantially from the base-case ICER
only when using the 1-year time horizon, with an ICER of £33,764 per QALY
gained. The manufacturer also presented base-case ICERs for the subgroups of
ACS specified in the scope, which were £2,551 per QALY gained for STEMI,
£5,217 per QALY gained for NSTEMI and £5,310 per QALY gained for unstable
angina.
3.16 The manufacturer carried out deterministic sensitivity analyses to the base case
and showed the effects of changing 43 model parameters. Only the change to
the costs of the 'no further event' health state impacted substantially on the
results. When the cost of the 'no further event' health state for ticagrelor plus
aspirin was set to its lowest, ticagrelor plus aspirin dominated clopidogrel plus
aspirin (that is, ticagrelor plus aspirin was more effective and less expensive than
clopidogrel plus aspirin), whereas when the cost of the clopidogrel plus aspirin
'no further event' health state was set to its lowest, the ICER was £21,000 per
QALY gained. Changes in all other parameters did not increase the ICER beyond
£7,620.
3.17 The manufacturer ran scenario analyses for 0% and 6% discount rates, using
published rather than PLATO-derived utility values, removing the 0.0328
downwards utility adjustment and removing the age-related decrease in utility
per cycle. The results of the scenario analyses showed that the ICER for
ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin ranged from £2,358
to £4,699 per QALY gained.
3.18 The cost-effectiveness acceptability curve showed that at £5,000 per QALY
gained, the probability of ticagrelor plus aspirin being cost effective compared
with clopidogrel plus aspirin was 76.6%. At £20,000 per QALY gained, the
probability of ticagrelor plus aspirin being cost effective compared with

 
clopidogrel plus aspirin was 99.9%.
3.19 The manufacturer's submission also provided results for ticagrelor plus aspirin
compared with prasugrel plus aspirin for the subgroup receiving PCI, based on
the results of a published indirect comparison of the PLATO and TRITON-TIMI 38
trials. Because of the small proportion of patients who participated in the
TRITON-TIMI 38 substudy of quality of life (EQ-5D was collected in only 461 of
13,608 patients at baseline), the model incorporated utility information from the
literature, rather than from the substudy. If costs from the PLATO-HECON
substudy were not available, the manufacturer used NHS reference costs in the
analysis for prasugrel plus aspirin. The manufacturer obtained the cost of
prasugrel from MIMS, October 2010. The analysis of ticagrelor plus aspirin
compared with prasugrel plus aspirin resulted in an incremental cost of £227,
incremental QALYs of 0.065 and an ICER of £3,482 per QALY gained, with a
40-year time horizon. The manufacturer stated that the results of the indirect
comparison should be viewed with caution because of the problems associated
with the indirect comparison of ticagrelor plus aspirin with prasugrel plus aspirin
discussed in section 3.6.
ERG comments
3.20 The ERG conducted a literature search and agreed that the PLATO trial was the
only trial relevant to the decision problem. The ERG considered that the PLATO
trial was well designed with robust processes for randomisation and blinding. It
noted that compliance and deviations in protocol were similar across treatment
arms. Although only 281 patients in the PLATO trial were from centres in the UK,
the ERG considered that they were not dissimilar to other European participants.
The ERG also noted that participants in the PLATO trial were younger than
patients with ACS in England and Wales, but that the manufacturer's model
accounted for this difference.
3.21 The ERG noted that for patients with STEMI not undergoing PCI, NICE
recommends dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel plus aspirin) for at least 4
weeks (from NICE's previous guideline on MI: secondary prevention, now
replaced by NICE's guideline on myocardial infarction: cardiac rehabilitation and
prevention of further cardiovascular disease). From statements in the 'clinical

 
need and practice' and 'evidence and interpretation' sections of NICE's
technology appraisal guidance on drug-eluting stents for the treatment of
coronary artery disease, the ERG concluded that standard practice for STEMI
should include dual antiplatelet therapy for 3 months for patients undergoing
revascularisation with bare-metal stents and 12 months for patients undergoing
revascularisation with drug-eluting stents.
3.22 The ERG considered that the PLATO trial reflects current clinical practice and that
all patients received antiplatelet treatment at a clinically appropriate dose. The
ERG was satisfied with the manufacturer's means of categorising adverse events
from bleeding. The ERG expressed concerns about the components of the
primary efficacy end point in the PLATO trial. Firstly, the primary end point was
inconsistent with the concept that all components of an end point should be of
similar importance to patients. For example, the average utility values from the
12-month cohort in the PLATO-HECON study used in the manufacturer's model
differed by end point and were 0.246 for death from a vascular cause, 0.812 for
myocardial infarction and 0.736 for stroke. Secondly, the primary end point was
inconsistent with the concept that all components of an end point occur with
similar frequencies. For example, in 18,624 participants there were 795 vascular
deaths, 1,097 myocardial infarctions and 231 strokes during the median 9.1-month
follow-up in the PLATO study. Thirdly, the primary end point was inconsistent
with the concept that the effect of a treatment should have an effect of similar
magnitude and direction on all components of a primary end point. For example,
in the PLATO study, the HR for stroke (non-significantly higher with ticagrelor)
differed from those for myocardial infarction and death from vascular causes
(significantly lower with ticagrelor). The ERG concluded that the results of the
overall composite end point should be interpreted cautiously. The ERG also noted
that the manufacturer excluded 'silent' myocardial infarctions (defined as new or
presumed pathological Q waves on ECG in the absence of symptoms). The ERG
considered that the secondary end points and their components reflected those
used in other cardiovascular trials.
3.23 The ERG noted that the manufacturer tested whether the effectiveness and
safety of ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin differed
across 25 pre-specified and 8 post-hoc subgroups, without adjustment for
multiple comparisons. The ERG expressed concern about the large number of
subgroups and potential overemphasis of any statistically significant results from

 
these analyses, which might have occurred by chance alone. With these caveats
noted, the ERG observed that the regional analysis showed that in the USA,
patients randomised to ticagrelor plus aspirin did worse than those randomised
to clopidogrel plus aspirin.
3.24 For patients with STEMI who receive bare-metal stents, the ERG highlighted
concerns about the comparator treatment included in the economic evaluation. It
interpreted NICE's technology appraisal guidance on drug-eluting stents for the
treatment of coronary artery disease as stating that dual antiplatelet therapy for
3 months was standard practice for patients undergoing revascularisation with
bare-metal stents, whereas for patients undergoing revascularisation with drug-
eluting stents, NICE's previous guideline on MI: secondary prevention (now
replaced by NICE's guideline on myocardial infarction: cardiac rehabilitation and
prevention of further cardiovascular disease) recommends dual antiplatelet
therapy for 12 months. Another concern of the ERG was that the manufacturer
treated the STEMI group as a homogeneous population and estimated a single
ICER. By contrast, the ERG believed that STEMI has 4 distinct populations
differing by treatment: STEMI with medical management, STEMI revascularised
with drug-eluting stent, STEMI revascularised with bare-metal stent and STEMI
with other intervention (for example, CABG).
3.25 The ERG stated that as the trial was designed to test the efficacy of 12 months of
treatment, all patients should have been treated for 12 months. The ERG noted
that the PLATO trial design did not involve uniform duration of treatment, instead,
the protocol stipulated that patients could leave the study at their 6- or 9-month
visit if a predetermined number of primary end-point events had occurred by that
time. Approximately 44% of patients were followed up for 12 months in the trial.
This increased the uncertainty in the estimates of effectiveness at the conclusion
of the trial, which in turn was the prime driver of the Markov model and,
therefore, the long-term benefits for patients.
3.26 The ERG noted that the model featured 2 separate paths. In 1 path, after first
presentation with ACS, patients may have a subsequent non-fatal myocardial
infarction at any time during the decision-tree part of the model and remain in the
non-fatal myocardial infarction health state to the end of the decision-tree part of
the model, then progress to the 'post-myocardial infarction' state for all remaining
cycles until death (whether from cardiovascular or non-cardiovascular causes).

 
Similarly, patients may instead have a non-fatal stroke as their first event (after
the initial presentation with ACS) during a cycle, and then progress to the post-
stroke state until death. The ERG considered that this structure does not
represent reality, because it does not allow patients to have more than
1 myocardial infarction, more than 1 stroke, or both myocardial infarctions and
strokes in their lifetime following their initial presentation with ACS, and that this
may bias future costs and benefits. The ERG also noted that the model simplified
the natural history of treated cardiovascular disease by keeping constant the
transition probability of previously event-free patients (since initial treatment for
ACS) experiencing a non-fatal myocardial infarction or stroke throughout the
long-term Markov model. The modelling ignored the increase in risk associated
with other factors, notably, increasing age. The ERG considered that this
omission may have led to the manufacturer's model inaccurately estimating future
events, costs and progressive changes in the outcomes and quality of life of
patients.
3.27 The ERG was concerned that the model applied an average utility score for the
first year, whereas clinical experience showed that ACS patients experience an
initial decline in utility that steadily improves. Therefore, the ERG noted that the
ICER at 12 months may be an underestimate.
3.28 The ERG noted that in the manufacturer's submission the subgroups of interest in
the economic evaluation did not reflect the subgroups of interest in the clinical
section. The ERG could not verify the estimates of clinical effectiveness used in
the manufacturer's model ascribed to ticagrelor in patients with NSTEMI or
unstable angina. The ERG also noted that the manufacturer considered the
subgroup with unstable angina as a homogeneous group whereas, in clinical
practice in England and Wales, physicians typically categorise patients into
lowest, low, intermediate, high and highest risk groups using the Global Registry
of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) classification and treat them accordingly.
3.29 The ERG noted that the manufacturer adjusted the age of the modelled patients
to reflect the UK population with ACS. The ERG noted potential problems with the
methods chosen by the manufacturer, which may have led to inaccuracies. The
ERG established that these inaccuracies represented an 8% underestimate of
benefits from ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin and
suggested that the ICER presented by the manufacturer may be an overestimate.

 
3.30 The ERG acknowledged that use of healthcare resources was estimated in the
model using data from an imbedded health economic study, which collected
details of hospital care received by patients during the PLATO trial. For the
purposes of the model, only data for those patients in the 12-month cohort were
included. This cohort comprised of patients who, based on timing of enrolment,
had the potential to receive 12 months treatment with ticagrelor. The ERG also
noted that for each patient category in the model, the resources used by each
patient were calculated separately for each treatment arm, and these were
multiplied by a corresponding unit cost and totalled for an estimated hospital-
care cost per patient for the first 12-month period. The ERG had some concerns
relating to this type of resource analysis, and conducted a combined analysis of
resource use (taking the ticagrelor and clopidogrel groups together), making
some adjustments for double-counting of costs. Results suggested that the
health state costs with ticagrelor were £100 lower (rather than £371 lower, as in
the manufacturer's base-case) than the health state costs of clopidogrel, which
would have the effect of doubling the estimated ICER at the 1-year time horizon.
3.31 The ERG noted that the manufacturer's base-case analysis estimated costs for
the study drugs assuming 100% use in the trial period, despite evidence of
deaths before the end of follow-up, treatment withdrawals, and poor adherence
in some participants. The ERG instead incorporated data on drug use from the
PLATO trial and noted that this reduced the average cost of both ticagrelor and
clopidogrel substantially, and the difference in drug costs of ticagrelor plus
aspirin compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin reduced from £651 to £507 per
patient. Applying the ERG's amended age adjustment, resource use, and costs of
study drugs to the manufacturer's model resulted in a 42% increase in the
manufacturer's ICER for the 1-year time horizon from £36,177 to £51,204 per
QALY gained. However, the ERG emphasised that both the incremental costs and
additional benefits associated with ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with
clopidogrel plus aspirin were very small at longer time horizons, and subject to
considerable uncertainty.
3.32 The ERG conducted a wide-ranging sensitivity analysis, calculating overall
deterministic cost-effectiveness estimates for all combinations of 4 long-term
variables – survival gain at 12 months, life expectancy at 12 months, the mean
long-term utility value and the mean long-term discounted cost per patient year.
The most favourable ICERs for ticagrelor plus aspirin are £3,407 per QALY gained

 
for all patients, £3,551 per QALY gained for the STEMI group, £3,350 per QALY
gained for the NSTEMI group and £3,405 per QALY gained for the group with
unstable angina. Incorporating the least favourable combination of assumptions
resulted in an estimated ICER for ticagrelor plus aspirin below £20,000 per QALY
gained for each of the specified populations compared with 12 months'
clopidogrel plus aspirin treatment. The central estimates from these sensitivity
analyses were £7,897 per QALY gained for all patients, £8,872 per QALY gained
for the STEMI group, £7,215 per QALY gained for the NSTEMI group and £9,131
for the subgroup with unstable angina.
3.33 The ERG noted that there are no head-to-head trial data comparing ticagrelor
plus aspirin with prasugrel plus aspirin. With regard to the indirect comparison of
ticagrelor plus aspirin with prasugrel plus aspirin, the ERG considered that any
comparison of the PLATO and TRITON-TIMI 38 trials posed problems. The ERG
agreed with the manufacturer that sufficient clinical evidence is not yet available
for a credible indirect comparison of ticagrelor plus aspirin compared with
prasugrel plus aspirin for patients with ACS. It concluded that the effectiveness
and safety of ticagrelor compared with prasugrel remains unknown.
3.34 Full details of all the evidence are in the manufacturer's submission and the ERG
report.

 
4 Consideration of the evidence
4.1 The Appraisal Committee reviewed the data available on the clinical and cost
effectiveness of ticagrelor, having considered evidence on the nature of ACS and
the value placed on the benefits of ticagrelor by people with these conditions,
those who represent them, and clinical specialists. It also took into account the
effective use of NHS resources.
4.2 The Committee discussed the clinical management of ACS. It heard from the
clinical specialists that, in the UK, treatment options for people with STEMI are
prasugrel plus aspirin or clopidogrel plus aspirin, along with PCI with a bare-metal
or drug-eluting stent followed by dual antiplatelet treatment. The Committee
heard that the duration of treatment of clopidogrel does not vary whether a stent
is bare-metal or drug-eluting, because all people with ACS who undergo PCI, in
the acute setting, are treated with clopidogrel plus aspirin for 12 months. The
Committee heard that in UK clinical practice people with NSTEMI are offered
treatments depending on their GRACE or TIMI score; medical management is an
option for people at lowest risk of future adverse cardiovascular events, whereas
people at higher risk would be offered PCI and subsequent dual antiplatelet
therapy with clopidogrel and aspirin. The Committee heard from the clinical
specialists that in the UK most people with NSTEMI undergo PCI. The Committee
understood that of people in the UK with ACS, few have unstable angina and
often do not need revascularisation, but do receive dual antiplatelet therapy with
clopidogrel and aspirin. The clinical specialists stated that in the UK it is unusual
for a patient with STEMI to undergo CABG and that approximately 10% of patients
with NSTEMI undergo CABG.
Clinical effectiveness
4.3 The Committee considered the evidence for the clinical effectiveness of
ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel. The Committee noted that the
manufacturer based its submission on a large trial, PLATO, which compared
ticagrelor plus aspirin with clopidogrel plus aspirin. The Committee noted that
ticagrelor plus aspirin reduced the relative risk of myocardial infarction, stroke

 
and death from vascular causes by 16% compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin.
The Committee also noted that if the components of the primary end point were
considered individually, the reductions in myocardial infarction and death from
vascular causes were statistically significant (16% and 21% respectively) for
patients randomised to the ticagrelor plus aspirin group. The Committee also
noted the non-statistically significant increase in the incidence of stroke, in
particular haemorrhagic stroke, in patients randomised to the ticagrelor group.
The Committee considered the clinical evidence for ticagrelor plus aspirin
compared with clopidogrel plus aspirin in the subgroups of patients that were
specified in the scope (STEMI, NSTEMI and unstable angina) and noted that the
test for interaction showed no statistical difference between the groups (p=0.41),
interpreting this as no difference in the effectiveness between treatments by
clinical presentation of ACS. The Committee noted that the manufacturer had
performed a large substudy of quality of life based on EQ-5D scores, which
indicated no difference in the quality of life between people taking ticagrelor plus
aspirin and those taking clopidogrel plus aspirin.
4.4 The Committee heard from the clinical specialists that in general the trial was
representative of the population in the UK, although the trial had a younger
population and a higher proportion of men than the population with ACS in the
UK. The Committee understood that the manufacturer had accounted for age in
its analysis. The Committee noted comments from consultees and commentators
questioning the generalisability of the PLATO trial to UK clinical practice because
most of the patients presenting with ACS in the UK would receive medical
therapy only whereas 21% of patients in the PLATO trial received medical therapy
only. However, the Committee noted the clinical specialists' testimonies that most
STEMI and NSTEMI patients would receive PCI. The Committee was also aware
that results of the PLATO study showed no statistically significant difference in
effectiveness between the patients whose condition was managed medically or
otherwise. The Committee concluded that the trial was broadly reflective of
clinical practice in the UK.
4.5 The Committee was aware that nearly half (46%) of all patients in the study
received clopidogrel in hospital before randomisation, and that of those
randomised to clopidogrel, only approximately one-fifth received a loading dose
in the range (600 to 675 mg) recommended in the UK (600 mg). The Committee
also noted that not all patients in the PLATO trial received treatment for

 
12 months and that the median duration of treatment was 9 months. The
Committee heard that the results presented included those censored before
12 months. The Committee noted that the Kaplan–Meier curves depicting the 2
arms of the trial separated as early as 1 month and up to 1 year and, therefore,
concluded that neither the difference in loading doses of clopidogrel nor
censoring was likely to have substantially biased the results.
4.6 The Committee understood that ticagrelor is administered twice a day compared
with once a day with clopidogrel and heard from the patient experts that, in
practice, people may be less likely to take drugs twice a day. The Committee
noted that no clear differences had been established on adherence between
once-a-day clopidogrel and twice-a-day ticagrelor. The Committee noted
comments from consultees and commentators that, particularly with a
gastrointestinal bleed, the fast offset (time taken for ticagrelor to become
inactive after it is stopped) could put a patient at increased risk of myocardial
infarction and stroke more quickly than had the patient been taking clopidogrel,
and with insufficient time to consult a cardiologist. However, the Committee
heard from the manufacturer that missing a dose of ticagrelor would not result in
a lower level of platelet activation than if the patient were treated with clopidogrel
without missing a dose. The Committee heard that when a CABG is planned, the
marketing authorisation recommends stopping ticagrelor 7 days before the
procedure, suggesting that the offset is not as fast as had been suggested in the
consultation comments. The Committee also noted comments from consultees
and commentators that treatment with ticagrelor should be limited to people who
clinicians have counselled on the importance of adherence. The Committee heard
from the clinical specialists that people taking clopidogrel or ticagrelor would
usually receive information to ensure that they understand why adherence is
important and why stopping treatment early might increase the risk of recurrent
cardiovascular disease. Therefore, the Committee agreed that advice on
adherence should not explicitly be factored into the recommendations. Lastly, the
Committee noted that most patients with cardiovascular disease take drugs twice
a day, including statins in the evening. The Committee concluded that in the 'real
world' setting, the need to take medication twice a day rather than once a day
would be unlikely to substantially reduce the effectiveness of ticagrelor plus
aspirin relative to clopidogrel plus aspirin.
4.7 The Committee discussed the concerns about safety and adverse effects

 
associated with ticagrelor. The Committee heard that dyspnoea (shortness of
breath), ventricular pauses, increases in serum uric acid and increases in serum
creatinine from baseline were statistically significantly more common in the
ticagrelor group compared with the clopidogrel group, and noted that patients
randomised to ticagrelor were more likely to discontinue the study drug because
of adverse reactions. The Committee heard from the patient experts that
dyspnoea frustrated patients with ACS and the clinical specialists stated that a
patient randomised to ticagrelor was 9 times as likely to discontinue the study
because of dyspnoea as a patient randomised to clopidogrel, but that the
absolute risk, at less than 1%, was small. The Committee heard from the
manufacturer that the effects of dyspnoea were limited mainly to mild episodes.
The Committee noted no statistically significant difference in the primary safety
end point of major bleeding between ticagrelor plus aspirin and clopidogrel plus
aspirin but that patients on ticagrelor plus aspirin experienced more overall major
and minor bleeding as well as more major bleeding not related to CABG. The
Committee considered that the mortality benefit associated with ticagrelor
outweighed the risks and concluded that ticagrelor was a clinically effective
treatment option for people with ACS.
4.8 The Committee discussed whether ticagrelor plus aspirin would be more or less
effective in any subgroups including patients with STEMI, NSTEMI or unstable
angina. The Committee noted that several additional subgroups were presented
in the trial. The Committee noted that among those defined in the scope (STEMI,
NSTEMI, unstable angina) there was no statistically significant evidence of
heterogeneity, consistent with no difference in effectiveness of ticagrelor
compared with clopidogrel by clinical presentation of ACS. The Committee
appreciated that the numbers of patients by subgroup may have been too small
to detect a difference in effectiveness. The Committee heard from the
manufacturer that it had not corrected for multiple comparisons when analysing
the many subgroups. The Committee noted the comment from a consultee saying
that patients with unstable angina are unlikely to benefit from ticagrelor because
subgroup analysis shows benefit only for patients whose blood tests following
the index event were positive for troponin. The Committee noted, however, that
neither the test for interaction by clinical presentation of ACS nor the test for
interaction by whether a patient had a positive or negative test for troponin were
positive (p value for interaction 0.41 and 0.29 respectively). Lastly, no evidence of
statistical or biological plausibility was presented to support effect modification

 
by presentation of ACS, and there are no trials using ticagrelor for the primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Therefore, the Committee concluded that
providing specific recommendations only for patients with STEMI and NSTEMI
and excluding those with unstable angina would be speculative, would counter
the statistical evidence, and would risk excluding patients who could benefit from
treatment with ticagrelor.
4.9 The Committee was aware of comments from consultees and commentators that
the estimate of total mortality remained 'exploratory'. This was because the
analysis plan for PLATO stated that secondary end points should be tested
individually in a pre-specified order, so mortality should not have been included
because it followed the non-statistically significant result for stroke. The
Committee was aware that the result for the association between ticagrelor and
total mortality, while exploratory, had a HR of 0.78 and a 95% CI of 0.69 to 0.89,
so was likely to reflect a real decrease in total mortality associated with ticagrelor
plus aspirin.
4.10 The Committee noted the concerns around the indirect comparison of ticagrelor
plus aspirin and prasugrel plus aspirin highlighted in the manufacturer's
submission and reiterated by the ERG. The Committee concurred with this view
and concluded that the relative effectiveness of ticagrelor plus aspirin and
prasugrel plus aspirin was uncertain. The Committee concluded that no separate
recommendations could be made for ticagrelor compared with prasugrel.
Cost effectiveness
4.11 The Committee considered the estimates of cost effectiveness presented in the
manufacturer's submission and noted that all ICERs for ticagrelor were below
£5,400 for the whole population in which ticagrelor is licensed and the
subgroups. The Committee was aware of the concerns raised by the ERG around
the structure of the model adopted in the manufacturer's submission, and agreed
that the assumption that patients could not experience multiple cardiovascular
events over-simplified the clinical course of patients with ACS. The Committee
noted that if the model had included the possibility of more than 1 cardiovascular
event after the index event, and had accounted for the increased risk of a
cardiovascular event associated with having had prior events, then the ICERs for

 
ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel would be lower than in the manufacturer's
base case. This is because at the end of the 1-year decision tree, more patients
on clopidogrel than on ticagrelor had experienced a myocardial infarction or
stroke, and were therefore at higher risk of experiencing another event. The
Committee was aware of the ERG's concerns over the method used to adjust for
age, but agreed that this would not result in major changes to the ICERs. The
Committee also noted that it would have been more appropriate to incorporate a
utility value that reflected clinical practice rather than modelling the average
utility score, but acknowledged that this too was unlikely to have a large impact
on the ICERs. The Committee noted comments from consultees that the adverse
event profile should be fully built into the structure of the economic model. The
Committee was aware that the 1-year decision tree part of the economic model
took account of all costs and changes in quality of life associated with the
adverse events of treatment.
4.12 The Committee was aware of the ERG's concerns about the manufacturer's
method of estimating resource use and costs. It was aware that these limitations
could skew the differences in total costs between the 2 treatment arms. The
Committee accepted the ERG's adjustments to the manufacturer's model and
noted the resulting estimates of cost effectiveness. The Committee agreed that
the central ICERs from the ERG's sensitivity analysis (£7,897 per QALY gained for
all ACS, £8,872 per QALY gained for STEMI, £7,215 per QALY gained for NSTEMI
and £9,131 per QALY gained for unstable angina) represented the most plausible
estimates for the cost effectiveness of ticagrelor compared with clopidogrel. The
Committee noted that the ICERs produced with this analysis were within the
range normally considered to be a cost-effective use of NHS resources and
therefore ticagrelor plus low-dose aspirin should be recommended as a treatment
option for up to 12 months in adults with ACS. However, the Committee agreed
that the patient populations for STEMI and unstable angina needed to be further
specified.
4.13 The Committee noted that the inclusion criteria in the PLATO trial for patients
with STEMI, defined as ST elevation or new left bundle branch block on
electrocardiogram, included the 'intention to perform primary PCI'. The
Committee therefore agreed that only patients with STEMI that cardiologists
intend to treat with primary PCI should be treated with ticagrelor. The Committee
heard that there is a spectrum of severity with respect to unstable angina. The

 
Committee was aware that in clinical practice in the UK a diagnosis of unstable
angina could be made using less stringent criteria than those defined in the
PLATO trial. The Committee agreed that only patients with unstable angina
aligned with the definition in the PLATO trial should be treated with ticagrelor.
The Committee noted that the definition of unstable angina in the PLATO trial
was that patients were hospitalised and had to have ST-segment changes on
electrocardiography indicating ischemia, and that patients had at least 1 of the
following characteristics: age 60 years or older; previous myocardial infarction or
CABG; coronary artery disease with stenosis of 50% or more in at least 2 vessels;
previous ischaemic stroke, transient ischaemic attack, carotid stenosis of at least
50%, or cerebral revascularisation; diabetes mellitus; peripheral arterial disease;
or chronic renal dysfunction, defined as a creatinine clearance of less than 60 ml
per minute per 1.73 m2 of body-surface area. The Committee was aware that it
may be necessary to start treatment with ticagrelor immediately when a patient
presents with symptoms. However, the Committee was concerned that a wrong
diagnosis of unstable angina could result in the patient unnecessarily taking
ticagrelor. The Committee therefore agreed that it would be appropriate to
specify that before ticagrelor is continued beyond the initial treatment, the
diagnosis of unstable angina should first be confirmed, ideally by a cardiologist.
4.14 The Committee noted the comments from consultees and commentators about
whether 'lowest risk' patients (that is, patients who have a 6-month mortality of
1.5% or less as defined by the GRACE scoring system) should receive ticagrelor,
given that NICE's previous guideline on unstable angina and NSTEMI (now
replaced by NICE's guideline on acute coronary syndromes) stipulates that these
patients would not receive clopidogrel because the harms potentially outweigh
the benefits. The Committee concluded that, because patients potentially
suitable for treatment with ticagrelor with unstable angina must have at least 1
specific risk factor for myocardial infarction as well as ST-segment changes on
electrocardiography, these patients would therefore not be classed as 'lowest
risk'.
4.15 The Committee heard from the primary care trust expert that although treatment
with ticagrelor relative to clopidogrel appeared cost effective within the range
considered to represent good value for money by NICE, the high incidence of
ACS in England and Wales means that ticagrelor would substantially impact
budgets were it approved for use. The primary care trust expert noted that this

 
would invariably lead to reduced spending elsewhere for health, which would
include cardiology services. The Committee noted further comments received
from consultees that affordability was an issue that NHS commissioners needed
to consider 'very seriously'. Although the Committee agreed that that budget
impact would be substantial, it was possible that any services displaced might be
less cost effective than ticagrelor relative to clopidogrel. Moreover, the
Committee noted that NICE's guide to the methods of technology appraisal
states that budget impact and affordability are not relevant to its decision
making.

 
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 7 of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires integrated care boards, NHS England and, with respect
to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE technology appraisal guidance. When a NICE technology appraisal guidance
recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other technology, the NHS in
Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it within 2 months of the
first publication of the final draft guidance.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraphs above. This means that, if a
patient has acute coronary syndrome and the healthcare professional responsible
for their care thinks that ticagrelor is the right treatment, it should be available for
use, in line with NICE's recommendations.