=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "va-ecmo-for-extracorporeal-cardiopulmonary-resuscitation-ecpr-in-adults-with-refractory-cardiac-arrest-pdf-1899878221993669.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:45:57.941470",
  "file_size_bytes": 80676,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/va-ecmo-for-extracorporeal-cardiopulmonary-resuscitation-ecpr-in-adults-with-refractory-cardiac-arrest-pdf-1899878221993669.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

VA ECMO for extracorporeal
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(ECPR) in adults with refractory
cardiac arrest
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 22 October 2025
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg808
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG482.
1 Recommendations
For refractory cardiac arrest with a shockable heart
rhythm or reversible causes
1.1 Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) for extracorporeal
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) can be used as an option to manage in-
hospital and out-of-hospital refractory cardiac arrest in adults with a shockable
heart rhythm or reversible causes.
For refractory cardiac arrest with a non-shockable
heart rhythm or irreversible causes
1.2 More research is needed on VA ECMO for ECPR to manage in-hospital and out-
of-hospital refractory cardiac arrest in adults with a non-shockable heart rhythm
or irreversible causes, before it can be used in the NHS.
1.3 This procedure should only be done as part of formal research and an NHS
research ethics committee needs to have approved its use.

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
What this means in practice
For refractory cardiac arrest with a shockable heart rhythm or reversible causes
There is enough evidence on the safety and efficacy of this procedure for healthcare
professionals to consider VA ECMO for ECPR as an option.
Healthcare professionals should discuss the available options with the person with
refractory cardiac arrest (and their family members and carers as appropriate) before
a joint decision is made, if possible (see NICE's page on shared decision making).
Hospital trusts will have their own policies on funding procedures and monitoring
results. NHS England may also have policies on funding of procedures.
For refractory cardiac arrest with a non-shockable heart rhythm or irreversible
causes
There is not enough evidence to know if this procedure is effective. VA ECMO for
ECPR should only be done as part of formal research.
For everyone having the procedure
Auditing of outcomes
Healthcare professionals doing this procedure should collect data on safety and
outcomes of the procedure. Enter details about everyone having this procedure into
the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization registry and regularly review the data on
outcomes and safety. Healthcare professionals are also encouraged to enter data into
the National Cardiac Arrest Audit.
Who should be involved in the procedure
Patient selection should be done by a multidisciplinary team. The procedure should
only be done in centres specialising in using VA ECMO for ECPR for refractory cardiac
arrest and by healthcare professionals with specific training in this procedure.

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
What research is needed
More research is needed on:
• patient selection
• survival
• neurological outcomes
• timing of the intervention.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Clinical trial evidence suggests that, compared with conventional CPR, using VA ECMO for
ECPR improves the likelihood of surviving with good brain function in adults with refractory
cardiac arrest with a shockable heart rhythm or reversible causes. So, it can be used for
this group.
Clinical trial evidence is inconsistent for VA ECMO for ECPR in adults with refractory
cardiac arrest with a non-shockable heart rhythm or irreversible causes. So, it is uncertain
who in this group could benefit from this intervention, and more research is needed.
2 Information about the procedure
2.1 Extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) is a type of CPR that uses a
venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) machine to help
people when conventional CPR does not work. The goal of ECPR is to restore
circulation and gas exchange, and to allow time for other interventions.
2.2 In VA ECMO, blood is taken from the venous system (usually from the femoral
vein or the right atrium) and pumped through an oxygenator, where oxygen and
carbon dioxide are exchanged. It is then returned to the arterial system, usually
through the femoral or axillary artery, or the ascending aorta. People are usually
given a continuous infusion of an anticoagulant, usually heparin, to prevent blood
clotting in the extracorporeal system. ECPR is used when conventional CPR is
unable to restore spontaneous circulation.

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
3 Committee discussion
The condition
3.1 Cardiac arrest is when normal blood circulation suddenly stops because the heart
does not contract effectively. The underlying abnormal cardiac rhythms most
associated with cardiac arrest are ventricular fibrillation, asystole, pulseless
electrical activity, and pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Cardiac arrest leads to
loss of consciousness, respiratory failure and, ultimately, death. Refractory
cardiac arrest is defined as the lack of return of spontaneous circulation after
30 minutes of appropriate CPR, in the absence of hypothermia.
Current practice
3.2 Treatment for cardiac arrest includes immediate CPR to restore the circulation
and prevent subsequent brain injury. Defibrillation may be used to treat
ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia rhythms. Standard
care may also include mechanical ventilation, and medicines such as adrenaline
and amiodarone. Resuscitation Council UK's 2021 resuscitation guidelines contain
guidance on basic and advanced life support.
Unmet need
3.3 Mortality remains high and neurological outcomes from cardiac arrest remain
poor, despite advances in cardiac arrest management and post-resuscitation
care. Data from NHS England indicates that the ambulance service responds to
around 40,000 people needing resuscitation each year.
The evidence
3.4 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and a detailed

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
review of the evidence from 13 sources, which was discussed by the committee.
The evidence included 9 systematic reviews, 1 long-term randomised controlled
trial follow-up study, 2 retrospective registry studies, and 1 single-centre
retrospective study. It is presented in the summary of key evidence section in the
interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the appendix of
the overview.
3.5 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: survival with favourable neurological outcome and restoration of
organ function.
3.6 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: bleeding, leg ischaemia, stroke, infection, renal failure and circuit-related
complications.
3.7 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.8 VA ECMO for ECPR should only be done in centres specialising in using VA ECMO
for ECPR in refractory cardiac arrest.
3.9 VA ECMO for ECPR in refractory cardiac arrest is available in only a few centres.
3.10 The committee was told that there is a significant resource use associated with
VA ECMO for ECPR.
3.11 VA ECMO for ECPR in refractory cardiac arrest is primarily for people with
ischaemic heart disease.
3.12 Clinical experts advised that a shorter time between cardiac arrest and starting
VA ECMO was associated with better outcomes.
3.13 The committee was informed that outcomes were better in younger people with
fewer comorbidities.

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
3.14 The recommendations in this guidance include the use of VA ECMO during
pregnancy or in the postpartum period.
3.15 Some people who had VA ECMO have become organ donors, and their organs
have been transplanted.
Equality considerations
3.16 There are few centres that specialise in using VA ECMO for ECPR in the UK. So,
people in more rural areas may not have access to this intervention.
3.17 Pregnancy and maternity are protected characteristics under the Equality Act
(2010). Women, trans men and non-binary people with refractory cardiac arrest
who are pregnant, or who have recently been pregnant, may need to access this
intervention.
4 Committee members and NICE project
team
This topic was considered by NICE's interventional procedures advisory committee, which
is a standing advisory committee of NICE.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be evaluated.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that evaluation.
The minutes of each committee meeting, which include the names of the members who
attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE website.
Chair
Tom Clutton-Brock
Chair, interventional procedures advisory committee

VA ECMO for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) in adults with
refractory cardiac arrest (IPG808)
NICE project team
Each evaluation is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology analysts
(who act as technical leads for the evaluation), a technical adviser, a project manager and
an associate director.
Xia Li, Jessica Wilcock and Helen Gallo
Technical leads
Amy Crossley
Technical adviser
Alan Ashworth
Consultant clinical adviser
Corrina Purdue
Project manager
Anastasia Chalkidou and Emily Eaton Turner
Associate directors
ISBN: 978-1-4731-7276-0
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
