=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "va-ecmo-for-postcardiotomy-cardiogenic-shock-in-adults-pdf-1899878269022917.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:20.016009",
  "file_size_bytes": 77629,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/va-ecmo-for-postcardiotomy-cardiogenic-shock-in-adults-pdf-1899878269022917.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy
cardiogenic shock in adults
Interventional procedures guidance
Published: 18 December 2025
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg810
Your responsibility
This guidance represents the view of NICE, arrived at after careful consideration of the
evidence available. When exercising their judgement, healthcare professionals are
expected to take this guidance fully into account, and specifically any special
arrangements relating to the introduction of new interventional procedures. The guidance
does not override the individual responsibility of healthcare professionals to make
decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to implement the guidance, in their
local context, in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful
discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and foster good relations. Nothing in this
guidance should be interpreted in a way that would be inconsistent with compliance with
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 1
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 2 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
those duties. Providers should ensure that governance structures are in place to review,
authorise and monitor the introduction of new devices and procedures.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
This guidance replaces IPG482.
1 Recommendation
1.1 Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) can be used in
the NHS during the evidence generation period as an option to manage
postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock (PCS) in adults. There must be enhanced
informed consent and auditing of outcomes.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 3 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
What this means in practice
There are uncertainties around the safety and efficacy of VA ECMO to manage PCS. It
could be used if needed while more evidence is generated.
After this, this guidance will be reviewed and the recommendations may change.
Healthcare professionals do not have to offer this procedure and should discuss the
available options with the person with PCS (and their family and carers as
appropriate) before a joint decision is made, if possible.
Hospital trusts will have their own policies on funding procedures and monitoring
results. NHS England may also have policies on funding of procedures.
Enhanced informed consent
Because there are uncertainties about whether this procedure is safe and effective,
there must be an emphasis on informed consent when possible. Healthcare
professionals, when possible, must make sure that people (and their families and
carers as appropriate) understand the uncertainty and lack of evidence around a
procedure's safety and efficacy using NICE's advice on shared decision making and
NICE's information for the public. Healthcare professionals must also inform the
clinical governance leads in their organisation if they want to do the procedure.
Auditing of outcomes
Healthcare professionals doing this procedure should collect data on safety and
outcomes of the procedure. Enter details about everyone having this procedure into
the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization registry and regularly review the data on
outcomes and safety.
Who should be involved with the procedure
Patient selection should be done by a multidisciplinary team. The procedure could be
done in centres specialising in managing PCS and by healthcare professionals with
specific training in this procedure.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 4 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
What evidence generation is needed
Healthcare professionals must collect data specifically around the safety and efficacy of
this procedure, including on:
• patient selection
• the technology used
• short- and long-term survival outcomes
• complication rates.
Why the committee made this recommendation
Some people with PCS do not survive being taken off a cardiopulmonary bypass machine
after cardiac surgery. Evidence from observational studies suggests some of these people
would survive if VA ECMO were used, and some people may benefit more than others. But
there is a lack of good quality evidence.
VA ECMO is only suitable for a small number of people and is only available in a few
hospitals. So, it would be difficult to do randomised controlled trials that include people
with PCS. But other forms of data collection are possible. So, this procedure can be used
in the NHS during the evidence generation period.
2 Information about the procedure
2.1 Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) can be used to manage
postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock immediately after heart surgery, or to help
separation from cardiopulmonary bypass.
2.2 In venoarterial ECMO, blood is taken from the venous system (usually from the
femoral vein or the right atrium) and pumped through an oxygenator, where
oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged. It is then returned to the arterial
system, usually through the femoral or axillary artery or ascending aorta. People
are usually given a continuous infusion of an anticoagulant, usually heparin, to
prevent blood clotting in the extracorporeal system. For people with poor kidney
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 5 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
function, a haemofiltration unit may be added to the circuit.
3 Committee discussion
The condition
3.1 Postcardiotomy refers to the period immediately after open-heart surgery.
Postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock (PCS) is a rare but life-threatening situation
that happens when the efficiency of the heart as a pump is impaired and it is
unable to meet the body's needs. This means a person may be unable to be
separated from cardiopulmonary bypass after open-heart surgery. Persistent
cardiogenic shock cannot be managed with medicines alone.
Current practice
3.2 Treatment for PCS involves pharmacological treatments, including diuretics and
inotropic agents, and mechanical circulatory support, including intra-aortic
balloon pumps. Without using mechanical circulatory support, PCS has a very
high risk of death, with mortality reported as high as 76%.
Unmet need
3.3 VA ECMO is used to provide cardiac and respiratory support for people with PCS.
Unlike a heart–lung (cardiopulmonary) bypass machine, it tends to be used for
days to weeks after surgery rather than for hours during surgery, allowing the
heart time to recover. ECMO provides circulatory support and allows time for
other treatments to promote recovery, or may be a bridge to a long-term
mechanical solution or transplant. It aims to improve patient outcomes.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 6 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
The evidence
3.4 NICE did a rapid review of the published literature on the efficacy and safety of
this procedure. This comprised a comprehensive literature search and detailed
review of the evidence from 12 sources (13 publications), which was discussed
by the committee. The evidence included 4 systematic reviews, 3 retrospective
registry studies, 1 multicentre retrospective study and 4 single centre
retrospective studies. It is presented in the summary of key evidence section in
the interventional procedures overview. Other relevant literature is in the
appendix of the overview.
3.5 The professional experts and the committee considered the key efficacy
outcomes to be: restoration of organ function and bridging to recovery, transplant
or long-term support.
3.6 The professional experts and the committee considered the key safety outcomes
to be: bleeding, leg ischaemia, stroke, infection, renal failure and circuit-related
complications.
3.7 Patient commentary was sought but none was received.
Committee comments
3.8 Clinical experts advised that some centres provide elective VA ECMO for people
who are more likely to have PCS, and it is routinely used in some centres.
3.9 Clinical experts advised that VA ECMO can be done either peripherally or
centrally. Central VA ECMO is used more commonly after cardiac surgery.
3.10 It would be difficult to do randomised controlled trials in people with PCS. So,
other types of data collection such as registries could be useful.
3.11 The recommendations in this guidance include use of VA ECMO during pregnancy
or in the postpartum period.
3.12 Clinical experts advised that this procedure could have a better outcome when it
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 7 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
is used for post-transplant support because of primary graft dysfunction.
3.13 Some people who had VA ECMO have become organ donors and their organs
have been transplanted.
3.14 The committee was told that starting VA ECMO to manage PCS as early as
possible is very important for better outcomes.
3.15 The committee was told that a high level of nursing expertise and input from a
perfusionist are needed to support people on VA ECMO.
Equality considerations
3.16 Not all cardiac surgery centres specialise in using VA ECMO in the UK. So, people
in some areas may not have access to this procedure.
3.17 Pregnancy and maternity are protected characteristics under the Equality Act
(2010). Women, trans men and non-binary people with cardiogenic shock who
are pregnant, or who have recently been pregnant, may need to access this
intervention.
4 Committee members and NICE project
team
This topic was considered by NICE's interventional procedures advisory committee, which
is a standing advisory committee of NICE.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be evaluated.
If it is considered there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from participating
further in that evaluation.
The minutes of each committee meeting, which include the names of the members who
attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE website.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
--- Страница 8 ---
VA ECMO for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock in adults (IPG810)
Chair
Tom Clutton-Brock
Chair, interventional procedures advisory committee
NICE project team
Each evaluation is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more health technology analysts
(who act as technical leads for the evaluation), a consultant clinical adviser, a project
manager and an associate director.
Xia Li, Jessica Wilcock and Helen Gallo
Technical leads
Amy Crossley
Technical adviser
Alan Ashworth
Consultant clinical adviser
Corrina Purdue
Project manager
Anastasia Chalkidou and Emily Eaton Turner
Associate directors
ISBN: 978-1-4731-7488-7
Endorsing organisation
This guidance has been endorsed by Healthcare Improvement Scotland.
© NICE 2025. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8
conditions#notice-of-rights). of 8
