=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "volanesorsen-for-treating-familial-chylomicronaemia-syndrome-pdf-50216257168837.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:51:10.444784",
  "file_size_bytes": 181199,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/volanesorsen-for-treating-familial-chylomicronaemia-syndrome-pdf-50216257168837.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

--- Страница 1 ---
Volanesorsen for treating
familial chylomicronaemia
syndrome
Highly specialised technologies guidance
Published: 21 October 2020
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/hst13
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
--- Страница 2 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guidance represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, health
professionals are expected to take this guidance fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients. The application of the
recommendations in this guidance is at the discretion of health professionals and their
individual patients and do not override the responsibility of healthcare professionals to
make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation
with the patient and/or their carer or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Commissioners and/or providers have a responsibility to provide the funding required to
enable the guidance to be applied when individual health professionals and their patients
wish to use it, in accordance with the NHS Constitution. They should do so in light of their
duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance
equality of opportunity and to reduce health inequalities.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 2 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 3 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Contents
1 Recommendations .................................................................................................................... 4
2 The condition ............................................................................................................................ 5
3 The technology ........................................................................................................................ 7
4 Consideration of the evidence ................................................................................................ 9
Nature of the condition ......................................................................................................................... 9
Impact of the new technology ............................................................................................................. 10
Cost to the NHS and value for money ................................................................................................. 18
Model assumptions ............................................................................................................................... 20
Impact of the technology beyond direct health benefits and on the delivery of the specialised
service .................................................................................................................................................... 27
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................. 28
5 Implementation .........................................................................................................................29
6 Evaluation committee members and NICE project team ......................................................30
Evaluation committee members .......................................................................................................... 30
NICE project team ................................................................................................................................. 30
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 3 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 4 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
1 Recommendations
1.1 Volanesorsen is recommended, within its marketing authorisation, as an option
for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome in adults with genetically
confirmed familial chylomicronaemia syndrome who are at high risk of
pancreatitis, and when response to diet and triglyceride-lowering therapy has
been inadequate. It is recommended only if the company provides volanesorsen
according to the commercial arrangement.
Why the committee made these recommendations
Familial chylomicronaemia syndrome is a rare and potentially life-threatening condition
that has a significant effect on the quality of life of people with the condition, and their
families and carers. People with the condition have severe abdominal pain, unpredictable
and recurrent acute pancreatitis and fatigue, and need to have a restricted low-fat diet.
Current treatment options are limited.
Clinical trial evidence shows short-term benefits with volanesorsen, including reduced
triglyceride (a type of fat found in the blood) levels. It is uncertain whether this is
maintained in the longer term, particularly at the licensed dose, which was not used in
clinical trials.
There are also other uncertainties, especially around volanesorsen's effect on acute
pancreatitis and the utility values used in the economic model. Despite these,
volanesorsen is likely to provide important clinical and psychological benefits for people
with familial chylomicronaemia syndrome, and value for money within the context of a
highly specialised service. It is therefore recommended for use in the NHS.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 4 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 5 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
2 The condition
2.1 Familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (FCS) is a rare genetic metabolic disorder of
lipid metabolism caused by homozygous mutations in the lipoprotein lipase gene.
It is characterised by high levels of triglycerides in the plasma and a build-up of
chylomicrons (the lipoprotein particles responsible for transporting dietary fat
from the intestine to the rest of the body). Symptoms include repeated episodes
of severe abdominal pain, unpredictable and recurrent episodes of acute
pancreatitis, liver and spleen enlargement, and fatigue. Acute pancreatitis is a
life-threatening condition for which intensive care may be needed. Repeated
attacks of acute pancreatitis may lead to chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes can
develop as a result of pancreatitis and often makes FCS more difficult to manage.
2.2 Current treatment options for people with FCS are limited. To keep plasma
triglyceride levels low, management consists of severely restricting dietary fat
intake (usually to between 10 g and 20 g daily, about a quarter of the normal daily
intake suggested for an adult) and consuming no alcohol. People with the
condition may take several drugs to control pain and other symptoms of FCS,
including corticosteroids, analgesics, anxiolytics, antidepressants, diabetes
treatments and antithrombotic drugs. People on a fat-restricted diet need
supplements of essential fatty acids (linoleic and alpha linolenic acids) and fat-
soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E and K). In addition, treatments for
hypercholesterolaemia (such as fibrates, nicotinic acids and statins) may be
prescribed but are of limited value. The strict dietary regimen is highly restrictive
and often challenging for people with the condition and their families. Also,
people often still have high triglyceride levels even when the diet is closely
followed.
2.3 The prevalence of FCS is estimated to be 1 to 2 per million people, which equates
to about 55 to 110 people in England. At the time of the evidence submission,
there were thought to be around 80 to 100 people with FCS eligible for treatment
with volanesorsen in the UK.
2.4 Treatment with volanesorsen has been provided since March 2018 under an Early
Access to Medicines Scheme at several specialist centres. The company
explained that, at the time of evaluation, 20 people were having volanesorsen
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 5 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 6 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
(with treatment duration ranging from 1 to 15 months). A further 5 people have
been identified to start treatment.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 6 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 7 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
3 The technology
3.1 Volanesorsen (Waylivra, Akcea) is an antisense oligonucleotide inhibitor of
apolipoprotein C-III (apoC-III) production. ApoC-III inhibits the metabolism of
triglycerides via the actions of both the lipoprotein lipase and lipoprotein
lipase-independent pathways. It selectively binds to apoC-III mRNA to prevent
the production of the apoC-III protein, so increasing metabolism of triglycerides.
Volanesorsen has a marketing authorisation 'as an adjunct to diet in adult patients
with genetically confirmed familial chylomicronemia syndrome (FCS) and at high
risk for pancreatitis, in whom response to diet and triglyceride-lowering therapy
has been inadequate'. Volanesorsen is administered by subcutaneous injection.
The recommended starting dosage, as described in the summary of product
characteristics, is 285 mg once weekly for 3 months, followed by down titration
to a maintenance dosing schedule of once every 2 weeks. If there has not been a
greater than 25% reduction in triglyceride levels, or if these remain above
22.6 mmol per litre at 3 months, treatment should be stopped. If response is
inadequate (in terms of serum triglyceride reduction) after 6 months of treatment,
an increase in dosing frequency to 285 mg once weekly should be considered.
Dosing may also change at 9 months and later depending on response to
treatment and platelet levels.
3.2 The adverse reactions listed as very common (that is, occurring in 1 in 10 people
or more) in the summary of product characteristics for volanesorsen include
thrombocytopenia and injection site reactions. For full details of adverse
reactions and contraindications, see the summary of product characteristics.
3.3 Before starting treatment with volanesorsen, platelet count should be measured.
If it is below 140×109 per litre, another measurement should be taken about a
week later to reassess. If platelet count remains below 140×109 per litre at a
second measurement, treatment should not be started. Because of concerns
about thrombocytopenia, an enhanced monitoring scheme has been
implemented during clinical trials and in clinical practice. For full details of
monitoring schedules, see the summary of product characteristics.
3.4 The price of volanesorsen for a single-use syringe (285 mg) is £11,394 (excluding
VAT; company's evidence submission). The company has a commercial
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 7 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 8 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
arrangement. This makes volanesorsen available to the NHS with a discount. The
size of the discount is commercial in confidence. It is the company's responsibility
to let relevant NHS organisations know details of the discount.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 8 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 9 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
4 Consideration of the evidence
The evaluation committee (see section 6) considered evidence submitted by Akcea
Therapeutics, the views of people with the condition, those who represent them and
clinical experts, NHS England and a review by the evidence review group (ERG). See the
committee papers for full details of the evidence. In forming the recommendations, the
committee took into account the full range of factors that might affect its decision,
including in particular the nature of the condition, the clinical effectiveness, value for
money and the impact beyond direct health benefits.
Nature of the condition
Burden of disease
4.1 The patient and clinical experts explained how the condition affects all aspects of
the lives of people with familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (FCS), and their
families and carers. It has a significant effect on a person's independence, and
their ability to work and have a social life. People with FCS live in constant fear of
having a life-threatening attack of acute pancreatitis (AP) and recurrent hospital
admissions. This can be depressing for them, and worrying for their families and
carers. Unpredictable hospital admissions can disrupt both a patient's and carer's
work. Also, the children of people with FCS often have to be carers for their
parents and siblings. The committee also heard that people with FCS are often
unable to participate in usual family activities because of strict dietary
restrictions. This can have a substantial emotional effect on them and their
families. The patient experts explained that FCS is a hidden disease because
people who do not have the condition often find it difficult to understand the
challenges associated with it. This has made it difficult for people with FCS, and
their families and carers, to get support. The committee concluded that FCS is a
rare, serious and potentially life-threatening condition that can affect the lives of
people with the condition, and their families and carers.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 9 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 10 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Unmet need
4.2 The clinical experts explained that FCS is a relentless condition, and that
currently there are no effective drug treatments available. They noted that, in the
absence of treatment targeting FCS, dietary advice is a mainstay of supportive
treatment. The patient experts noted their frustration with this because dietary
control can be very challenging, particularly if diabetes develops. They also
explained that people may have mixed experiences of symptom and disease
management approaches, depending on their triglyceride (TG) levels, but that a
new treatment option would offer considerable hope to them and to their families.
The committee recognised that there is a significant unmet need for effective
treatment options for FCS.
Diagnosis
4.3 The clinical experts explained that, historically, FCS has been diagnosed by
several clinical criteria, including abdominal pain, AP and raised TG levels
refractory to lipid-lowering therapy (but not due to other causes such as type 2
diabetes or hypothyroidism). Given the rarity of the disease, people with FCS
often have delayed diagnosis, or misdiagnosis and inappropriate treatment.
Genetic diagnosis is becoming more common. It identifies some mutations in
lipoprotein lipase, apolipoprotein 2 and 5, lipase maturation factor 1 or GPIHPB1
genes, which code for proteins involved in lipoprotein lipase activity. The expert
from NHS England noted that genetic testing would become available from April
2020, which will help with the identification and genetic confirmation of FCS.
Impact of the new technology
Clinical evidence
4.4 The clinical evidence available for volanesorsen included:
• APPROACH (n=66) – a double-blind randomised placebo-controlled trial that
assessed the efficacy and safety of volanesorsen (n=33) compared with
placebo (n=33). Volanesorsen was administered by subcutaneous injection
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 10 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 11 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
(285 mg) once weekly. After the 52-week trial period, patients could either
have a 13-week follow up or enter the APPROACH OLE open-label extension
study.
• COMPASS (n=114) – a multicentre double-blind randomised placebo-
controlled trial in patients with hypertriglyceridaemia from many different
causes; only 7 patients had FCS. Volanesorsen was administered by
subcutaneous injection (285 mg) once weekly. After 26 weeks, patients could
either have a 13-week follow up or enter the APPROACH OLE open-label
extension study.
• APPROACH OLE – an ongoing single-arm open-label study assessing the
safety and efficacy of dosing and extended dosing with volanesorsen.
Volanesorsen was administered by subcutaneous injection (285 mg) once
weekly. Information about treatment arms and patient numbers is considered
academic in confidence by the company, so cannot be presented.
• The Early Access to Medicines Scheme (EAMS; n=20) – an ongoing
programme that provides access to volanesorsen (administered by
subcutaneous injection, 285 mg once every 2 weeks) for people with FCS,
including those who have previously had treatment in APPROACH and
APPROACH OLE.
Emphasis on clinical efficacy outcomes was given to data from APPROACH
and APPROACH OLE. The committee noted some small differences in
baseline characteristics between the people in the trials and the clinical
population in England. These included levels of abdominal pain, which was
high in APPROACH compared with the population in England. Also, 11% of
patients in APPROACH had previously had alipogene tiparvovec (a gene
therapy for treating lipoprotein lipase deficiency). This may have lowered the
baseline levels of pancreatitis compared with levels seen in patients in clinical
practice in England. The ERG noted that the baseline differences added
uncertainty to the estimates of true relative treatment effect, although the
level of additional uncertainty was unclear. The committee agreed that this
introduced uncertainty into consideration of the clinical data, but concluded
that it was acceptable for decision making.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 11 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 12 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Generalisability of the trial population to clinical practice
4.5 Most of the patients in the company's clinical trials had a genetic diagnosis of
FCS, in line with the marketing authorisation. The committee discussed whether
the trial populations would represent people with FCS seen in the NHS. It noted
that about 50% of patients in APPROACH lacked known functional mutations in
the lipoprotein lipase gene. However, it understood that some patients with FCS
may have unknown gene mutations that cannot currently be identified, and such
patients may have entered the trial. However, because the marketing
authorisation requires a genetic diagnosis of FCS, these patients would not be
part of the NHS population potentially eligible for treatment with volanesorsen.
The company explained that there is no clear correlation between types of gene
mutation and disease prognosis. The committee agreed that, given this, it was
reasonable to consider the trial population to be generalisable to clinical practice.
High risk of pancreatitis in relation to TG levels
4.6 The marketing authorisation for volanesorsen stipulates that people must have a
high risk of pancreatitis to be able to have the drug. The committee discussed
how clinicians would interpret this in clinical practice. The ERG explained that
anyone with high TG levels could be considered to be at high risk of pancreatitis
but queried whether clinicians might interpret the marketing authorisation
differently. The clinical experts explained that TG levels can be variable and
volatile in people with FCS but agreed that they would generally consider people
with high TG levels to be at high risk of pancreatitis. They also explained that TG
levels vary across and within patients with FCS and fluctuate over time, and that
TG levels are high most of the time if they are uncontrolled. The clinical experts
explained that the decision to treat is based on discussions with patients and
consideration of their needs. The committee concluded that the definition in the
marketing authorisation for 'high risk of pancreatitis' is likely to include anyone
with high TG levels.
Dosing
4.7 The volanesorsen dose stated in the marketing authorisation was not used in the
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 12 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 13 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
clinical trials or for the population in the EAMS (see section 4.4). The committee
discussed the implications of this for interpreting the evidence on volanesorsen's
clinical efficacy and safety. It queried the frequent dose adjustments and pauses
seen in studies. It concluded that these would be more likely under the intensified
monitoring regime of the EAMS and the clinical trials, than in clinical practice. It
also considered the effect of these on patients, TG levels and clinical outcomes.
It understood that, in the EAMS, patients all started on once every 2 weeks
dosing but could up titrate to the licensed dose if response was not sufficient.
The committee considered that the reason given for the dose adjustments and
pauses was understandable from a general pharmacological point of view. But in
the clinical trials the dose adjustments and pauses added uncertainty to the long-
term efficacy and safety of volanesorsen and the likely rate of stopping
treatment. The committee concluded that the difference between the licensed
and trialled dosing regimens contributed to further uncertainties. It also
concluded that, because of the higher dosing and initially less-intensive
monitoring in trials, volanesorsen's short-term effect on clinical and safety
outcomes may have been overestimated and there are uncertainties in
interpreting its clinical benefits in the long term.
Percentage change in TG level as a surrogate outcome
4.8 The primary outcome measure in APPROACH was the percentage change from
baseline in TG levels at month 3 (there were no formally designated primary and
secondary outcomes in APPROACH OLE). In APPROACH, at month 3,
volanesorsen treatment was associated with a statistically significant and
clinically meaningful change in TG levels compared with placebo (percentage
difference in change from baseline in TG: 94.1%, 95% confidence interval [CI]
-121.7 to -66.6; p<0.0001). Clinical data from APPROACH OLE is considered
academic in confidence by the company, so cannot be presented here. However,
the company stated that the results showed a substantial decrease in TG levels
with volanesorsen at month 3. The committee was aware that percentage change
in TG levels is a surrogate outcome for clinical outcomes such as AP. The
company explained that percentage change in TG levels is a commonly used and
important outcome that shows an effect of volanesorsen. The ERG explained
that, at subsequent time points, the decrease in TG levels was generally lower
than that seen at month 3 in APPROACH, but that any possible waning effect of
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 13 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 14 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
volanesorsen is probably small. This was supported by additional evidence from
APPROACH OLE that became available during consultation, although the ERG also
noted that follow up in studies did not appear to go beyond around 3 to 4 years.
Therefore, the long-term effects of volanesorsen measured by percentage
change in TG levels were uncertain. The committee concluded that volanesorsen
was effective in lowering TG levels in people with FCS, although the extent of the
effect in the long term was unclear.
Relationship between TG levels and AP in people with FCS
4.9 The committee considered the company's evidence on a possible dose-response
relationship between TG levels and the risk of AP, suggesting that increased TG
levels lead to an increased risk of AP. TG levels below 10 mmol per litre are
associated with a low risk of AP. Risk increases with TG levels above 10 mmol per
litre, becoming particularly high at levels of 22.6 mmol per litre or more. These
assumptions were used in the company's economic model to define certain
health states (see section 4.17). The clinical experts noted that there is a linear
relationship between TG levels and risk of AP in the general population. However,
there is a lack of evidence about whether this dose-response relationship is
generalisable to FCS. TG levels can be variable and volatile among people with
FCS (see section 4.6), and they are likely to have individual thresholds at which
they are at high risk of developing AP. The clinical experts also suggested that
people with FCS may have AP at lower TG levels than patients with raised TG
levels from other causes.
4.10 During consultation, the company provided further information on the possible
relationship between TG and AP in people with FCS. It explained that people with
FCS are at a higher risk of AP compared with those with other
hypertriglyceridaemia disorders. This is because they have chronically higher
mean serum TG levels, their TG levels are more volatile and they have higher
rates of previous AP. The ERG argued that the peaks in TG concentration may
simply be a function of higher average TGs, and that there is no evidence linking
incidence of AP to peak TG levels. The clinical experts noted that TG
concentration alone may not be an adequate surrogate for AP in people with FCS.
This is because the relationship between TGs and chylomicrons (the lipoprotein
particles that transport triglycerides derived from dietary fat from the intestine to
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 14 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 15 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
the rest of the body via lipoprotein lipase activity) may be more relevant for this
condition. Because FCS is caused by a defect in lipoprotein lipase, TGs cannot be
converted in people with this condition, resulting in chylomicron accumulation
and consequently pancreatitis. There are no clinical data supporting this
argument because chylomicrons are less readily quantified. However, a reduction
in both TGs in chylomicrons and AP events in people having volanesorsen was
seen in APPROACH. The committee accepted that there is a general linear
relationship between TG levels and risk of AP, but it remained uncertain whether
this was generalisable to people with FCS. It concluded that, although it is
uncertain whether the linear relationship applies in FCS, reduced TG levels may
be associated with reduced risk of AP in this population, as shown in the clinical
trials.
Study outcomes
Responder analysis
4.11 The company did several responder analyses. The committee particularly looked
at 2 of them. This is because they were highly relevant to the decision making for
TG level bands as defined in the company's economic model (see section 4.17)
and to volanesorsen's stopping rule in the summary of product characteristics
(see section 3.1 and section 4.17). These analyses included:
• attaining fasting TG levels of below 750 mg per decilitre (8.5 mmol per litre)
between baseline and month 3
• a 40% reduction in fasting TG levels between baseline and month 3.
In APPROACH, 76.7% (23 out of 33) of patients having volanesorsen and 9.7%
(3 out of 33) of those on placebo met the first of these endpoints (odds ratio:
186.16, 95% CI 12.86 to not applicable; p<0.0001). Similarly, for the second of
these endpoints, evidence from APPROACH showed that more patients on
volanesorsen (87.9%, 29 out of 33) met the endpoint compared with those on
placebo (9.1%, 3 out of 33) at month 3 (odds ratio: 99.69, 95% CI 15.75 to
631.06; p<0.0001). Generally, a reduction in TG levels at month 3 or a
moderate-to-high relative reduction in TG levels was seen. The ERG noted
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 15 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 16 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
that this showed that a substantial proportion of patients were likely to
continue treatment after stopping rules are applied (see section 3.1). The
clinical experts explained that it is difficult to identify a population threshold
in TG levels for clinical events (such as pancreatitis) in FCS. However, they
agreed that there is likely to be a level below which someone is unlikely to
have pancreatitis, so it is appropriate to consider that people whose TG levels
reach the endpoints defined above are at 'lower risk'. The ERG highlighted
that the evidence showed that response rates wane over time, so the
treatment effect may vary. But the committee concluded that, based on the
evidence, TG levels would likely fall to levels at which pancreatitis is less
likely in a substantial proportion of patients. However, it remained uncertain
whether this benefit would last in the long term.
Acute pancreatitis
4.12 Evidence from a preplanned safety analysis showed that 1 patient having
volanesorsen (n=33) and 3 patients on placebo (n=33) had AP (p=0.6132) in
APPROACH. A post-hoc analysis comparing the AP event rate 5 years before
treatment with the AP event rate while on treatment in the same trial showed a
statistically significant difference in favour of volanesorsen (p=0.0242). The same
post-hoc analysis comparing the event rate of AP 5 years before treatment with
that while on treatment in APPROACH OLE gave a rate ratio of 0.13 (p value not
reported). The ERG highlighted that this risk estimate was highly uncertain
because it was derived from a before–after comparison using patients as their
own control, so there was a high risk of recollection bias. In general, the ERG
noted that volanesorsen might reduce AP events, but the effect size was unclear.
The committee agreed with the ERG and noted that the company's risk estimate
of AP was uncertain and subject to risk of bias because of the methods used.
Abdominal pain
4.13 The preplanned efficacy analyses describing the average maximum intensity of
abdominal pain during the on-treatment period in APPROACH did not show a
statistically significant difference between treatment arms. However, an
exploratory analysis showed that, among those who had abdominal pain at
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 16 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 17 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
baseline in APPROACH (17 out of 66 patients across the 2 arms), patients having
volanesorsen (7 out of 33) had a statistically significant reduction in the average
maximum intensity of abdominal pain, compared with those on placebo (10 out
of 33; p=0.0227). The ERG commented that this difference may have been
because of the higher baseline rates of abdominal pain in this subgroup, making
it easier to detect an effect. The committee noted that some patients continued
to have a certain level of abdominal pain while on volanesorsen, which made its
effect on abdominal pain unclear. However, it acknowledged that, because
abdominal pain is a frequent symptom associated with FCS, the reduction in pain
seen in the trial would be beneficial for people with the condition.
Overall study results
4.14 The committee concluded that the clinical trial evidence showed that
volanesorsen would likely provide benefits in lowering TG levels and on clinical
outcomes (AP and abdominal pain). It also considered the additional data from
APPROACH OLE and the EAMS that became available during consultation (mostly
confidential, therefore cannot be presented here). These data showed a trend
towards a TG-lowering benefit in people having the treatment at weekly and
fortnightly dosing. The ERG noted that the evidence raised the possibility that
response to the treatment may wane over time, but any reduction was likely to be
small. The committee concluded that volanesorsen would likely provide some
long-term benefits, although this was associated with substantial uncertainty,
particularly at the licensed dose.
Health-related quality of life
4.15 Health-related quality of life was measured using the EQ-5D and SF-36 in
APPROACH and APPROACH OLE. In APPROACH, there was no statistically
significant change from baseline for the EQ-5D-5L or SF-36 at month 3
(p=0.2920 and p=0.6627 respectively), at month 6 (p=0.5923 and p=0.9226
respectively) and at month 12 (p=0.4079 and p=0.7912 respectively). Baseline
EQ-5D values were very high for both treatment arms (utility more than 0.97) in
APPROACH. The committee noted that this was not in line with the patient
testimonies, which indicated that FCS substantially affects every aspect of their
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 17 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 18 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
lives. One patient expert explained that the EQ-5D does not measure the aspects
of quality of life that FCS affects, for example, strict adherence to a low-fat diet
and the effect of that on their family and social lives. The committee noted that
the EQ-5D does not contain questions about difficulties posed by the restricted
diet, but does measure usual activities, pain and anxiety. Another patient expert
noted that people with FCS may have adapted because living with the condition
is their normal (for example, the fear of having AP, restrictions to usual activities
related to dietary restrictions), so no difference from baseline would be detected.
The committee recognised that the intermittent symptoms of FCS might explain
why a one-off questionnaire might not fully capture its effect on quality of life. But
it did not think that the clinical trial results showed that volanesorsen had no
effect on quality of life.
Adverse events
4.16 The committee discussed the adverse events reported in the 2 main clinical trials.
Common events (occurring in between 1 in 100 or more and fewer than 1 in 10
patients) in APPROACH were wide ranging, but the most frequent (in 1 in 10 or
more patients) were limited to injection site reactions, fatigue, headache and
thrombocytopenia. Seven (21%) patients in the volanesorsen group had serious
adverse events compared with 5 (15%) patients on placebo. The committee
recalled that safety risks had been identified with volanesorsen (see section 3.3),
and an intensified routine monitoring scheme had been implemented in clinical
trials and the EAMS. It noted, however, that the effect of volanesorsen on safety
outcomes and, consequently of stopping treatment, was uncertain at the
licensed dose in the long term.
Cost to the NHS and value for money
Company's economic model
4.17 The company presented an economic model comparing volanesorsen alongside a
low-fat diet with standard care. The model had 2 components: a 3-month
decision tree model and a long-term Markov model. In each 3-month model
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 18 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 19 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
cycle, patients moved between TG bands or remained in the same band, had AP,
developed chronic pancreatitis or died. Patients with historical AP moved to the
recurrent AP category when having AP. Treatment with volanesorsen was
assumed to be weekly within the initial 3-month period and fortnightly in the
Markov stage until treatment was stopped or death (in line with the dosing
schedule in the summary of product characteristics). All patients who had
standard care in the initial phase progressed to the standard-care Markov model.
Patients who had volanesorsen had to meet continuation criteria (a TG level
reduced by 25% or more or below 22.6 mmol per litre, or both) to remain on
volanesorsen, otherwise they progressed to the standard-care arm. The
population in the model was in line with the indication (see section 3.1). A high
risk of pancreatitis was defined as having had a previous AP event in the model.
The hypothetical cohort of patients:
• was assumed to be 41 years
• comprised 54.5% women and
• was assumed to have the same characteristics as patients in APPROACH:
－ AP history – 0 or 1 or more episodes in the past 5 years
－ baseline TG levels – below 10 mmol per litre (low-risk band); between
10 mmol per litre and below 22.6 mmol per litre (medium-risk band);
22.6 mmol per litre or more (high-risk band), which were used to define
health states in the Markov model.
4.18 The company's economic analysis adopted an NHS perspective and implemented
a 59-year time horizon (assumed to represent the maximum remaining lifetime of
a patient). A discount rate of 3.5% per year was used for both cost and health
outcomes. The committee was satisfied that the model structure reflected the
general course of the condition, although it recalled the uncertainty in the
relationship between TG levels and risk of AP in people with FCS (see
section 4.10).
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 19 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 20 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Model assumptions
Assumptions on volanesorsen's indirect and direct effects on AP
4.19 In the model, the company assumed that volanesorsen would reduce the risk of
AP:
• indirectly by reducing patients' TG-risk band, and
• directly by reducing the risk of AP independent of TG-risk bands.
In the company's original base case, the risk estimate associated with
volanesorsen's direct protective effect on the risk of AP (0.13, p value not
reported) was estimated from a post-hoc analysis. This compared the event
rate of AP in patients 5 years before enrolment in APPROACH OLE with their
event rate while on treatment (see section 4.12). The rate ratio of 0.13 was
applied to patients with historical and recurrent APs in the model. The ERG
noted this would represent double counting of the benefits because it was
calculated from a population in whom there was already potential for
reducing TG levels (via the indirect effect of volanesorsen on TG levels). It
was also subject to risk of bias because patients were their own control and
because of regression to the mean. The ERG therefore removed some of the
double counting by applying a multiplication factor of 0.50 to both historical
and recurrent AP rates within specific TG-risk bands. The committee
preferred the ERG's assumption, given the lack of clinical trial data, but
acknowledged that volanesorsen was likely to have some protective effect on
risk of AP.
4.20 At consultation, the company explained that using an additional multiplication
factor was necessary because the size of the reduction in risk of AP with
volanesorsen was not adequately captured in the model. Therefore, in its updated
model, a rate ratio of 0.27 (to low or medium TG health states) and 0.28 (to high
TG health states) was applied. The company noted these ratios were midpoints
between 0.13 (original submission) and 0.35 (the ratio of pooled event rates of
volanesorsen once every 2 weeks dosing from APPROACH, APPROACH OLE and
COMPASS compared with the pooled event rates of placebo from APPROACH
and COMPASS in patients with a history of AP). The ERG highlighted that both
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 20 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 21 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
estimates were subject to considerable risk of bias because 0.13 was derived
from a before–after comparison using patients as their own controls, and 0.35
may be confounded because there was no placebo arm in APPROACH OLE. It also
suggested that some double counting will remain irrespective of the rate ratio
selected. The committee recalled the concern about the relationship between TG
level and risk of AP. It recognised the limitations of developing an evidence base
for an ultra-rare disease, and around estimating the most plausible rate-ratio
values associated with using volanesorsen given the lack of trial data. In the
absence of robust evidence, the committee considered that a rate ratio of 0.29,
applied to all patients in the model, was reasonable.
Stopping treatment
4.21 The committee noted that relatively high stopping rates were seen across the
clinical studies. In APPROACH, 42% (14 out of 32) of patients stopped treatment
before month 12, and 79% stopped before week 104. It understood that adverse
events were the most common reason for stopping. Stopping rates from
APPROACH OLE were considered academic in confidence by the company, so
cannot be presented here. The committee was also aware that only 1 patient
stopped treatment in the EAMS because of cancer recurrence. However, it
questioned whether this would be seen in clinical practice because of the
different dosing regimen (see section 3.1 and section 4.17). The ERG explained
that the stopping rate at the licensed dose in clinical practice was currently
unknown but was unlikely to be zero.
4.22 At consultation, the ERG clarified that, based on clinical expert opinion, it would
expect a stopping rate of 10% per year and up to 20% continuing treatment in
total. The committee understood that stopping treatment in trials was not only
because of the stopping rules in the summary of product characteristics (see
section 3.1). Stopping rates (including rate of dose pauses and missed doses)
from the EAMS are commercial in confidence by the company, so cannot be
presented here. However, the committee noted that the data suggested some
people would stop treatment or pause doses in the trials and the EAMS,
regardless of dosing regimen even after being on treatment for 2 or 3 years.
Therefore, this trend seems to support some late treatment stopping.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 21 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 22 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
4.23 The company explained that, because of the strengthened monitoring schemes
put in place since APPROACH, fewer people in the EAMS have stopped treatment.
This is perhaps because these patients have the highest risk of AP and it is
difficult to manage the disease on diet alone. The ERG noted the uncertainties
about stopping treatment because of the limited follow-up time for patients in the
EAMS. The committee noted that, because of the relatively high drop-out rate
seen in the clinical trials, some stopping would be likely in clinical practice, even
with education and monitoring in place. It concluded that there were likely to be
dose pauses and people stopping treatment in the long term, but at a much lower
rate than in clinical trials.
Time on treatment
4.24 The committee recognised that the rate of stopping treatment affected the model
results. Stopping could happen in the model because of not meeting the
continuation criteria (see section 4.17), death, lack of adherence to the treatment
and monitoring, or adverse events. In the company's original model, stopping was
modelled by fitting parametric survival functions to time-on-treatment data for
32 patients on volanesorsen once every 2 weeks within APPROACH OLE and
using log-normal curves to predict when treatment would stop. After
consultation, the company capped the stopping rate at 20%. The committee
understood that relatively high stopping rates were seen across the clinical
studies (see section 4.21) and considered this cap implausible. However, it was
also aware that only 1 person stopped treatment in the EAMS even though
patients had volanesorsen once every 2 weeks from the start in the scheme (see
section 4.21). The committee recalled the discussion on declining stopping rates
in the long term, and that there may be differences in the stopping rate between
clinical trials and the EAMS because of the different settings as explained by the
company (see section 4.14). Based on this, it preferred the ERG's exponential
function, which does not suggest that most patients continue after a high initial
rate of drop out. The committee agreed that the ERG's initial stopping rate of 10%
per year (see section 4.22) was more likely in clinical practice than the low rate in
the EAMS. It therefore concluded that the ERG's exponential curve best reflected
the likely change in stopping rate with volanesorsen in clinical practice over time,
and that this assumption should be used in the model.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 22 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 23 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
Source of utility data
4.25 The utility data collected in APPROACH were not used in the model. The company
explained that this was because utility values for both treatment arms were
higher than the average UK index value and it considered them implausible.
Instead, the utility values for the base case were derived from a vignette study
commissioned by the company. In response to concerns raised by the committee
about the vignette study, the company provided additional information on the
methodology after consultation. Substantial information about this study is
considered academic in confidence by the company, so cannot be discussed in
detail here. The committee noted several methodological issues associated with
the study, including the process of constructing the vignettes, uncertainties in
the dimensions that defined health states and value-laden language used
throughout the vignette. The committee concluded that the source of utility
values was subject to risk of bias and that this would contribute to uncertainty in
the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER).
Using utility values derived from the vignette study
4.26 The ERG noted that the vignettes did not distinguish between patients who were
on treatment and those who were not, but instead by low- or high-risk TG bands
and whether an AP event occurred. This contrasted with how the utility values
were used in the company's model. In the model, utility for a patient was
determined by whether they were having volanesorsen or standard care on the
basis that mean TG levels were considerably lower in patients who were having
treatment. The ERG had concerns about this approach. It provided alternative
utilities in its base case, which used the vignette results but linked the utility to
TG levels rather than treatment. It also assumed that values for patients with
historical AP lay halfway between those with no prior AP and those with AP with
lingering effects. The committee preferred the ERG's approach of linking utility
values to TG levels and health states.
4.27 After consultation, the company changed the allocation of utility values in its
model. It assigned the high TG utility value from the vignette to those with a TG
level of more than 22.6 mmol per litre, and the low TG utility value from the
vignette to remaining patients. The ERG explained that this logic was not
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 23 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 24 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
consistent with the vignette or the original submission, pointing out that people
with TG levels between 10 mmol per litre or more to less than 22.6 mmol per litre
should not be considered as having non-elevated TGs. The committee
considered that the company's approach in allocating the utility values for the
intermediate group was problematic. It concluded that the ERG's approach of
linking utility values to TG levels and health states was acceptable for decision
making.
Utility for carers
4.28 The company included utility decrements for carers in the economic model,
based on estimates from the literature. In the company's original base case, it
used the values from NICE highly specialised technology submission (metreleptin
for treating lipodystrophy) as a proxy for carers of people with FCS, assuming a
0.1 utility decrement for carers. In the evaluation consultation document, the
committee and ERG highlighted concerns about the source of the proxy value
and around the value itself. The committee asked the company to explore
alternative values.
4.29 After consultation, the company presented an alternative utility value, decreasing
the decrement from 0.1 to 0.04 in the updated model. The company explained
that the decrement was a midpoint value between the effect on family utility for
patients with new musculoskeletal conditions (0.03) and the utility decrement
between treated and untreated groups (0.05) in the metreleptin submission. The
company believed that this was a fair valuation of quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) gain with volanesorsen treatment for the families of people living with
FCS. The committee discussed the appropriateness of applying the new value. It
recalled that the patient and clinical experts explained the substantial effect of
FCS on the lives of patients, and their families and carers (see section 4.1). It
noted that people with FCS are often unable to participate in usual family
activities because of strict dietary restrictions. This can have a substantial
emotional and psychological effect on them and their families. The patient
experts explained that the effect of volanesorsen on social interaction, including
engaging with their families, was substantial. They also explained that not getting
recurrent pain and being able to go out and socialise with their families made a
lot of difference to them and their families.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 24 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 25 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
4.30 The ERG was concerned that the new decrement may be an overestimation. It
noted that, in the literature, the loss in utility with existing mental or
musculoskeletal conditions would be 0.01. It also noted that volanesorsen does
not remove the need for a low-fat diet, so some social isolation for the family
could remain and 0.01 may be more appropriate than 0.04. The committee
acknowledged the positive psychological effect that volanesorsen may have on
patients and carers, and on their lifestyle. It agreed that there would be some
effect of FCS on the utility for carers but thought that applying the 0.04 utility
decrement may be unrealistic. It considered that it may be smaller than 0.03,
which represents a family decrement for patients with new musculoskeletal
conditions. It concluded that it would prefer a utility decrement of 0.02 applied in
the model.
Factors not considered by the committee: comorbidities and
malnutrition
4.31 The company explained that some comorbidities and symptoms such as joint
pain, numbness or tingling of digits, use of corticosteroids and opioids, and
nutritional status were not included in the model. It pointed out that these can all
seriously affect the quality of life of people with FCS, but were not captured in
the model because of similar features with either the vignette descriptions or
other symptoms. The committee understood that these factors could have
affected quality of life and therefore cost effectiveness. However, it considered
that, if these factors were associated with either a decrease or increase in TGs, it
would have preferred to see them in the vignette study. It also noted that it was
not presented with sufficient evidence on this in the clinical trials. The committee
concluded that, because no empirical data were provided, the possible effect of
these factors on the cost-effectiveness estimate was unknown.
Applying QALY weighing
4.32 The committee understood that the interim process and methods of the highly
specialised technologies programme (2017) specifies that a most plausible ICER
of below £100,000 per QALY gained for a highly specialised technology is
normally considered an effective use of NHS resources. For a most plausible ICER
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 25 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 26 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
above £100,000 per QALY gained, judgements about the acceptability of the
highly specialised technology as an effective use of NHS resources must take
account of the magnitude of the incremental therapeutic improvement, as
revealed through the number of additional QALYs gained and by applying a 'QALY
weight'. It understood that a weight between 1 and 3 can be applied when the
QALY gain is between 10 and 30 QALYs. The committee discussed the QALY
gains associated with volanesorsen. It highlighted that these were below 10 in the
analysis that was most plausible to the committee (the exact QALY gains are
considered commercial in confidence by the company, so cannot be reported
here). The committee concluded that there was no evidence to suggest that
volanesorsen would meet the criteria for applying a QALY weight.
Cost-effectiveness results
4.33 The committee considered the results of the economic analysis, taking into
account the company's base case and the ERG's exploratory scenario analyses. It
acknowledged that neither the company's base case nor the ERG scenarios were
without flaws. The committee's preferred base case included the following
assumptions:
• a rate ratio of 0.29 for volanesorsen's protective effect on AP risk
• a stopping rate of 10% per year (exponential model)
• applying utility data in the model using the ERG's approach of linking utility
values to TG levels and health states
• a carer utility decrement of 0.02.
The committee acknowledged that substantial uncertainties remained about
volanesorsen's protective effect on AP risk and applying utility data from the
vignette study in the model. It noted that, because of the outstanding
uncertainties, the company revised its commercial offer for volanesorsen.
This brought the ICER down to £98,013 per QALY gained compared with best
supportive care and using the committee's preferred assumptions. Taking
this into account, the committee concluded that the most plausible ICER
could be considered an effective use of NHS resources for highly specialised
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 26 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 27 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
technologies.
Impact of the technology beyond direct health
benefits and on the delivery of the specialised
service
4.34 The committee discussed the effects of volanesorsen beyond its direct health
benefits and the testimony of the patient experts. It understood from patient and
clinical experts that all aspects of patients', families' and carers' lives are affected
by the condition. It noted that there could be a significant negative financial
effect for families if they have to give up work, but considered this less likely
because of the age of the patients. The patient experts explained that
volanesorsen has changed their experience of living with FCS, although they still
have to restrict dietary fat intake. The committee concluded that volanesorsen
may affect patients beyond the direct health benefits, but it noted that the full
effect of these benefits had not been quantified. The committee considered
these benefits in its decision making.
Other factors
4.35 The committee noted a potential equality issue raised by clinical experts,
recognising that FCS prevalence can be higher in some cultural and ethnic groups
in the UK. However, it concluded that its recommendation applies equally,
regardless of ethnicity, so a difference in disease prevalence does not in itself
represent an equality issue.
4.36 The committee was aware that, according to the IN-FOCUS study, having FCS
affects the decision of women who may wish to become pregnant. It recognised
that people who are pregnant or wish to become pregnant are an important
clinical group. However, while not contraindicated in pregnancy, the summary of
product characteristics advises that the use of volanesorsen should be avoided
during pregnancy. Therefore, the committee concluded that it would be
inappropriate to consider pregnant women as a specific subgroup. It also noted
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 27 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 28 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
that it was not presented with data on the use of volanesorsen during pregnancy,
or how the drug could influence the outcome of pregnancy (it does not cross the
blood barrier). The committee concluded that any recommendations would apply
equally, regardless of pregnancy, so this does not represent an equality issue.
4.37 The committee discussed the innovative nature of volanesorsen, noting that the
company considered that the drug's mechanism of action represents a step
change in managing FCS. The patient experts explained that having a treatment
available would give people with the condition hope, both for themselves and for
family members and carers.
Conclusion
4.38 The committee recognised that FCS is a rare, serious and, at times, life-
threatening condition that can substantially affect the lives of patients, and their
families and carers. The committee understood that there is an unmet need for an
effective treatment. After considering all available evidence, and the opinions of
the clinical and patient experts, the committee agreed that volanesorsen was
associated with improved TG levels and likely reduced the risk of clinical
outcomes such as AP and abdominal pain in the short term. It concluded that
volanesorsen would likely provide some long-term benefits too. However, this
was associated with substantial uncertainty, particularly at the licensed dose,
which was not used in the clinical trial that provided the evidence base for
decision making.
4.39 Overall, the committee considered that the available evidence suggested that
volanesorsen could provide important clinical benefits. It considered that there
were uncertainties in interpreting the evidence and the company's assumptions in
the model, especially around volanesorsen's protective effect on AP and the
utility values used in the model. It also noted that volanesorsen did not meet the
criteria for a QALY weighting to be applied. Acknowledging the uncertainties and
taking into account other benefits of volanesorsen that may not be fully captured
in the analysis, the committee concluded that volanesorsen can be considered a
cost-effective use of NHS resources for highly specialised technologies.
Therefore, the committee recommended volanesorsen as an option for treating
FCS.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 28 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 29 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
5 Implementation
5.1 Section 8(6) of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Constitution
and Functions) and the Health and Social Care Information Centre (Functions)
Regulations 2013 requires clinical commissioning groups, NHS England and, with
respect to their public health functions, local authorities to comply with the
recommendations in this evaluation within 3 months of its date of publication.
Because volanesorsen has been available through the early access to medicines
scheme, NHS England and commissioning groups have agreed to provide funding
to implement this guidance 30 days after publication.
5.2 The Welsh ministers have issued directions to the NHS in Wales on implementing
NICE highly specialised technologies guidance. When a NICE highly specialised
technologies guidance recommends the use of a drug or treatment, or other
technology, the NHS in Wales must usually provide funding and resources for it
within 2 months of the first publication of the final evaluation document.
5.3 When NICE recommends a treatment 'as an option', the NHS must make sure it is
available within the period set out in the paragraph above. This means that, if a
patient has familial chylomicronaemia syndrome and the doctor responsible for
their care thinks that volanesorsen is the right treatment, it should be available
for use, in line with NICE's recommendations.
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 29 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
--- Страница 30 ---
Volanesorsen for treating familial chylomicronaemia syndrome (HST13)
6 Evaluation committee members and
NICE project team
Evaluation committee members
The highly specialised technologies evaluation committee is a standing advisory
committee of NICE.
Committee members are asked to declare any interests in the technology to be appraised.
If it is considered that there is a conflict of interest, the member is excluded from
participating further in that appraisal.
The minutes of each evaluation committee meeting, which include the names of the
members who attended and their declarations of interests, are posted on the NICE
website.
NICE project team
Each highly specialised technology appraisal is assigned to a team consisting of 1 or more
health technology analysts (who act as technical leads for the appraisal), a technical
adviser and a project manager.
Orsolya Balogh
Technical lead
Yelan Guo
Technical adviser
Joanne Ekeledo
Project manager
ISBN: 978-1-4731-3887-2
© NICE 2024. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and- Page 30 of
conditions#notice-of-rights). 30
