=== МЕТАДАННЫЕ ===
{
  "original_filename": "zvaf191.pdf",
  "converted_date": "2026-01-31T14:46:19.795418",
  "file_size_bytes": 727070,
  "original_format": "pdf",
  "document_type": "Guidelines",
  "source_folder": "Guidelines",
  "full_path": "00_RAW_CARDIOLOGY/Guidelines/zvaf191.pdf"
}

=== СОДЕРЖАНИЕ ===

SPECIAL ARTICLE
European Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing (2025) 00, 1–10

Patient and public involvement in the
management and prevention of cardiovascular
disease: a statement of the Association
of Cardiovascular Nursing and Allied
Professions of the ESC and the ESC Patient
Forum
Jeroen M. Hendriks 1,2,3*, Paul McGreavy 4, Suzanne Fredericks 5,
Ian Jones 6,7, James Ainslie4, Ana Gomes 8,9, and Julie Sanders 10,11
1Department of Nursing, Maastricht University Medical Centre, P. Debeyelaan 25 6229 HX Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands; 2Department of Health Services Research, Care and
Public Health Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands; 3Centre for Heart Rhythm Disorders, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia; 4European Society of
Cardiology Patient Forum, Sophia Antipolis, France; 5Daphne Cockwell School of Nursing, Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, Canada; 6School of Nursing and Advanced Practice,
Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK; 7Liverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Liverpool John Moores University, University of Liverpool, Liverpool Heart and Chest
Hospital, Liverpool, UK; 8Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Center for Interrdisciplinary Research in Health, Porto, Portugal; 9Local Health Unit – Aveiro Region, Clinical Academic Center,
Egas Moniz Health Alliance, Aveiro, Portugal; 10Faculty of Nursing, Midfwifery and Palliative Care, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; and 11St Bartholomew’s Hospital, Barts
Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom
Received 23 May 2025; revised 27 June 2025; accepted 23 September 2025; published 5 January 2026
Patient and public involvement (PPI) plays a pivotal role in enhancing the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD), at multiple
levels. The partnership with patients and the public, those who are directly affected by CVD, is central to delivering personalized care, and may con-
tribute to decreasing the burden of CVD and reducing health inequalities. This statement describes the concept of PPI and highlights the role of PPI
across different settings including: clinical practice, research, regulatory processes, and policy and clinical guideline development. Recognition of the
value of PPI and how to create environments and infrastructure to embed PPI into these areas requires further attention, specifically for under-
represented communities. Therefore, considerations for good practice as well as future directions for improvement are provided. Whilst the con-
tent of this paper focusses on CVD, the insights provided can be applied to other conditions.
* Corresponding author. Tel: +31 43 3872367, Email: Jeroen.hendriks@mumc.nl
© The European Society of Cardiology 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact
reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—
for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

2 J . M . H e n d r ik s e t a l.
Graphical Abstract
Patient and public involvement in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease:
A statement of the association of cardiovascular nursing and allied professions of the esc and the esc patient forum
Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) is key in multilevel management and prevention of cardiovascular disease
Core considerations across all cardiovascular disease areas of work
Training Board Financial
Definition Diversity
for PPI membership support and
of PPI and inclusion
partners and leadership resources
Role of PPI across different areas
Clinical Research Policy Regulatory bodies
Individual patient care Research priorities CVD national and Regulatory processes
Collective engagement PPI training international policy
in major system changes Grant and funding bodies Prioritising health
Research committees services
Dissemination Guideline development
Journals / publication
Considerable scope for further inclusion, standardization, implementation and development
across all sectors involved in cardiovascular care exist. Such progress will evolve PPI to
become the cornerstone for advancing the future visions of healthcare
.............................................................................................................................................................................................
Keywords Cardiovascular disease • Consumer involvement • Decision-making • Patient and public
Highlights
• People with lived experience should be meaningfully engaged in all aspects that affect their health and wellbeing. Patient and public involvement
(PPI) is therefore pivotal in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD).
• Partnerships with patients and the public form the foundation of personalized care, and may ultimately contribute to reducing the burden of
CVD globally.
• Nurses and allied professionals play essential roles within PPI approaches. This statement outlines the concept of PPI and its application across
diverse settings including: Clinical practice, research, regulatory processes, policy, and clinical guideline development. In addition, it highlights
implications for good clinical practice and future directions for further advancement.
• The Association of Cardiovascular Nurses and Allied Professions in collaboration with the European Society of Cardiology Patient Forum
defines PPI in cardiovascular care as: ‘PPI in cardiovascular care refers to the active and meaningful ways in which patients, carers, and members
of the public equitably contribute their lived experience and articulate their priorities to shape the development, organization, delivery, im-
plementation, and evaluation of services for the prevention and treatment of CVD across clinical care, research, regulation, and policy.
Patient and public involvement should be equitable, inclusive, transparent, and a core activity of all aspects of cardiovascular care’.
Introduction million since 1990.4Furthermore, health inequalities, including sex, eth-
nicity, and socioeconomic status, significantly contribute to CVD
‘Nothing for us, without us’1reinforces the principle that people with burden, exist both between and within countries,5 with low–
lived experience should be meaningfully engaged in defining approaches middle-income countries (LMICs) being particularly affected.6The in-
that affect their health and wellbeing.2The impact of cardiovascular dis- clusion of patients and the public, those who are directly affected by
ease (CVD) remains globally devastating. Cardiovascular disease per- CVD, in the development and implementation of CVD healthcare ser-
sists as the leading cause of death3and is the source of considerable vices, research and associated policy is central to delivering persona-
burden for the 253 million people globally affected by it, with years liv- lized care, decreasing CVD burden, and reducing health inequalities.
ing with CVD associated disability doubling to 34.4 million from 17.7 Such involvement has been reported to support prioritizing health
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

Patient and public involvement in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease 3
services based on need,7improve the quality and trust of regulatory de-
cisions,8 increase the relevance, cultural appropriateness and overall Table 1 Key definitions relating to patient and public
quality of research,9and reduce research waste.10 involvement in clinical practice, research, regulation and
policy development
The principle of patient and health user involvement is not new. In
the UK community health councils were formed by the government
Terms used Definition/description
in the mid-1970’s to give healthcare users an opportunity to contribute ...........................................................................................
to health service design and operation.11At the end of the same dec-
Clinical care/service
ade, The World Health Organization (WHO) reported the ‘right and
Patient and public ‘Ways in which patients can draw on their
duty’ for people ‘individually and collectively’ to participate in the ‘plan-
ning and implementation of their health’.12 Similarly, the European involvement experience and members of the public
Union faced a change in the traditional relationship between healthcare can apply their priorities to the
professionals and patients during the HIV pandemic, while in the evaluation, development, organization,
mid-1990’s the European Medicines Agency (EMA) inspired adaptation and delivery of health services’19
of European legislation and lay the groundwork for involving patients in
Engagement in practice ‘Raising awareness, and sharing knowledge
all its processes and decision-making.13Over subsequent years the level
transformation efforts by and for patients or the public’20
and breadth of patient and public involvement (PPI) has grown to in-
clude policy development, regulatory activity, healthcare service deliv- Research
ery, and research although country-specific strategies remain limited. Patient and public ‘Research being carried out ‘with’ or ‘by’
Notable differences include the UK which has frameworks for PPI in involvement (PPI) members of the public rather than ‘to’,
public health commissioning,14 quality guidance and standards,15 re-
‘about’ or ‘for’ them. It is an active
search priority setting,16and standards for UK public involvement in re-
partnership between patients, carers,
search.17Similarly, the Patient Centre Outcomes Research Institute in
and members of the public with
the USA, the Canadian Institute for Health Research Strategy for
Patient-Orientated Research and the Consumer and Community researchers that influences and shapes
Advisory Group (CCAG) associated with the National Health and research’21
Medical Research Council in Australia promote and advise on proactive Patient and public ‘A range of methods of involving members
patient and health consumer partnership in health and research. While engagement of the public in research’22
PPI in high-income countries (HIC) is continuously evolving, such en-
Regulatory authorities
gagement in LMICs can be tokenistic due to time and financial chal-
lenges, gaps in health infrastructure (opportunity and access), cultural Patient engagement ‘The effective and active collaboration of
and social stigmas, and uncertainty in the patient role in involvement.9,18 patients, patient advocates, patient
This statement has been developed in collaboration with represen- representatives, and/or carers in the
tatives of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Patient Forum, processes and decisions within the
and in accordance with ICJME criteria, they have been included in the
medicines lifecycle, along with all other
authorship team. It aims to explore PPI in CVD clinical practice, re-
relevant stakeholders when
search, regulation, and policy, including enablers and considerations
appropriate’23
to its use. Given the importance, and current variability in the applica-
tion of PPI in CVD, areas of good practice and reflections for current Policy
and future development will be indicated. Despite the focus on CVD, Meaningful engagement ‘Respectful, dignified and equitable
the content of this article will provide useful insights that can be trans- inclusion of individuals with lived
lated and applied to other conditions and specialities.
experience in a range of processes and
activities within an enabling
environment where power is
Defining patient and public
transferred to people; valuing lived
engagement and involvement experience as a form of expertise and
applying it to improve health
There are a myriad of terms and approaches to the inclusion of patients outcomes’2
and the public working in partnership with clinicians, researchers, regu-
latory authorities, and policy-makers. Key definitions include PPI and
patient engagement, sometimes with different definitions within differ-
ent contexts (Table 1) while other discipline-specific definitions, for ex-
ample, community-based participation research (CBPR), participatory dignified, and equitable inclusion) those with lived experience in all
action research and co-design in research (see Supplementary health processes.2
material online, Table S1) also exist. Despite subtle differences in the
definition of engagement and involvement (Table 1), these are often ACNAP’s definition of patient and public
used interchangeably with the intention of recognizing the importance
involvement
of the active involvement of patients, carers, families, and the public
contributing across all domains of CVD activity—namely that PPI in- Patient and public involvement is essential for delivering cardiovascular
cludes actions with or by patients or the public, and not to, about, or care that is patient-centred, equitable, and responsive to the needs and
for them, engagement refers to e.g. raising awareness and sharing priorities of those it serves. Despite the array of definitions the concept
knowledge by and for patients and the public.20The 2023 publication of meaningful engagement of patients, members of the public and com-
by the WHO provides the first framework for non-communicable dis- munities, at all stages of clinical practice, research, regulation and policy
ease specialities, including CVD, to transition from ‘intent to action’ to processes is consistently recognized, they often lack specificity for car-
‘meaningfully engage’ (the transition of power through respectful, diovascular care. To address this, ACNAP has developed a definition of
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

4 J . M . H e n d r ik s e t a l.
PPI that aligns with its vision and the principles of the ESC Patient
Forum, drawing on the framework proposed by Tritter19and adapting (4) Include PPI in Board membership and leadership committees in
all settings, including professional organizations.
it to reflect their shared values and priorities in cardiovascular care.
The ACNAP definition is: patient and public involvement (PPI) in car- (5) Ensure PPI partnership is inclusive and diverse, involving part-
diovascular care refers to the active and meaningful ways in which pa- ners from under-represented communities.
tients, carers, and members of the public equitably contribute their (6) Secure financial support to establish meaningful PPI participa-
lived experience and articulate their priorities to shape the development,
tion, to sustain long-term involvement, and encourage impactful
organization, delivery, implementation, and evaluation of services for the
input; provide reimbursement of participants in terms of time
prevention and treatment of CVD across clinical care, research, regula-
and resources; ensure equity of financial compensation and sup-
tion, and policy. Patient and public involvement should be equitable, inclu-
port in LMIC.
sive, transparent, and a core activity of all aspects of cardiovascular care.
By establishing this definition, ACNAP provides a shared under-
standing of PPI, supports meaningful and inclusive involvement of pa-
tients and the public, guides implementation in clinical, research,
Patient and public involvement in clinical
regulatory, and policy settings, and ensures alignment with the ESC
Patient Forum’s commitment to patient-centred care and collabora- practice
tive decision-making. Patient and public involvement in clinical practice is based on the ex-
pectation that it will improve the outcomes and quality of decisions re-
lated to care and treatment. It can provide valuable insights into the
Methods
needs, values, and preferences of those living with a certain health con-
dition at the individual patient level. Collaboration between patients,
This statement is informed by literature retrieved from searching Ovid
and health care professionals may lead to valuable relationships includ-
Medline and PubMed databases from inception to 21st July 2025.
ing informed or shared decision-making (SDM). However, collective PPI
The following search strategy that combines key terms was used: (patient
or public or consumer or community or ‘person centred’) [adj3] (involve- as part of major system change goes considerably beyond the individual
ment or engagement or participant* or Advocacy or co-design)) [ti] OR patient level and can influence the development of organizational, pol-
(‘patient-led’ or ‘shared decision making’) [ti] OR (‘own care’ or ‘self care’ icy, and guidelines changes to transform models of care delivery to im-
or selfcare) [ti] OR cardiovascular diseases/or myocardial infarction/or cor- prove outcomes and reduce health inequalities.
onary disease/or stroke/or brain ischaemia/or death, sudden, cardiac/or Partnering with patients in clinical practice is regarded as a marker of
heart diseases/OR (‘cardiovascular disease’ or CVD or stroke or ‘heart dis- high-quality care and is considered an important pillar of person-
ease’ or ‘heart failure’ or ‘cerebrovascular disease’ or ‘peripheral arterial dis- centred care which calls for a whole of systems approach.24,25There
ease’ or ‘deep vein thrombosis’ or DVT or ‘pulmonary embolism’) [ti] OR
is increased consensus that such practices contribute to improved
(prevention or management or administration) [ti,ab] OR Primary
safety, quality of care, patient outcomes and experiences, and improve
Prevention/or Secondary Prevention/or Disease Management/.
The search was restricted to English language articles. The reference list the performance of healthcare services.26 Effective partnerships be-
of articles retrieved was searched, and publications that were part of per- tween clinicians and patients should be embedded into institutional
sonal databases or familiar to the authors of this work, were included and organizational practice and culture and based on the principles of
when appropriate. meaningful engagement—namely dignity and respect, power, and equi-
ty (such as neutralization of power imbalances and elimination of dis-
crimination), inclusiveness and intersectionality (by incorporating
Patient and public involvement in associations of the individuals’ identity and social factors), and commit-
ment and transparency from both parties.2Such partnerships could be
clinical practice, research,
effective in the development and promotion of person-centred care,
regulation, and policy development education, and training for patients and healthcare professionals, tools,
and resources for communication and to support SDM, integrated care
Common attributes of PPI across clinical practice, research, regulation, models, and measurement of success (e.g. patient experiences and
and policy is that there is inclusive, respectful, meaningful, active part- patient-reported outcomes).27
nership with those with lived experience to inform health, research,
regulation, and policy from priority setting to dissemination. To achieve
Patient and public involvement at the individual patient
this, core considerations relevant for all settings, as described in Box 1,
level should be actioned.
Patient and public involvement at the individual level concerns participa-
tion that relates to a patient’s own care. One common example of this
approach is the concept of SDM, defined as a communication process
Box 1 Core considerations for patient by which patients and clinicians collaborate to choose tests, treatments,
and care plans that most align with an individual patient’s preferences
and public involvement and values aligned with the best available evidence recommendations.28
Shared decision-making was conceived to diverge from the traditional pa-
(1) Establish a standardized global definition and framework for PPI ternalistic biomedical model of healthcare towards a more person-
in cardiovascular disease encompassing clinical, research, policy, centred approach and represents a middle ground between paternalistic
and regulatory activities. and a patient-autonomous approach; it is an equal partnership in which
the clinician and patient share responsibility for the decisions.29Shared
(2) Demystify PPI so that those from under-represented groups
decision-making tools have been designed to support patients and health-
feel able to partner and to contribute.
care professionals in the decision-making process. Thoughtful design of
(3) Identify the training and support needs of PPI members before
such tools, incorporating patients as partners in the development as
their involvement and develop training and support materials well at attention to crucial components to be included, are of vital
for those engaging in PPI activities. importance, and may improve decision acceptance, increase patient
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

Patient and public involvement in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease 5
engagement in the execution of the treatment and as a result improve of the populations that already benefit from good (access to) health-
outcomes.30 care, due to economic and social status, and those already experien-
A 2024 Cochrane review31reported that SDM improves communi- cing inequalities in healthcare.43
cation between patients and their health care professionals, patient un- Finally, considering facilitators and barriers in collective levels of
derstanding, acceptance, satisfaction, and involvement in medical meaningful patient participation in healthcare organizations is crucial.
decisions. However, a systematic review of 28 studies of SDM in older These may include (i) preconditions for patient participation, (ii) strat-
people identified 149 barriers and 67 facilitators which included chal- egy for patient participation, (iii) preparation for patients and staff for
lenges at patient (e.g. due to poor health, cognitive or physical impair- participation, (iv) support for patients and staff during participation,
ments), clinician (e.g. suboptimal interpersonal skills), and system level and (v) evaluation of participation. The result of this review and earlier
(e.g. pressure for time and high turnover of patients).32This indicates evidence highlights that while PPI can improve some healthcare metrics
that there are numerous variables that influence the SDM process preparation and planning are key to delivering a meaningful programme
which are equally evident within cardiovascular care. Mehawej et al.33 of PPI activities.44
found that older patients with atrial fibrillation and those with cognitive
impairment were less likely to engage in SDM for stroke prevention.
Nevertheless, education and explaining the treatment options is crucial
and nurses may be well placed to provide this.34 Another report Resources for patient and public involvement activities in
showed that patients experiencing ST elevation myocardial infarction
clinical
(MI) felt there was little choice other than to receive an invasive proced-
practice
ure while their cardiologists who were aware of the concept of SDM
felt that the principle was more relevant in those with non-ST elevation The financing of PPI activities is a key enabler to support PPI activity,2
MI suggesting that SDM is not considered as suitable or feasible in crit- and in many healthcare systems PPI reimbursement is mandated.45–49
ical situations where early and acute decision-making is required. Other key enablers, as stated in the WHO Framework, include redis-
However, conflicting values (e.g. on participation in care) of patients tributing powers, eliminating stigma, capacity building, and institutional-
and clinicians may also impact the therapeutic process and potential izing engagement. While in some countries governments have
for SDM: where patients might experience participation as being re- mandated that health authorities have a legal responsibility to engage
sponsible and accepting responsibility, whilst healthcare professionals patients and the public in the commissioning and delivery of services,14
might interpret participation as the vehicle to provide information for there is concern that there is a risk that only HIC will adopt the frame-
patients to act on this.35 work, as PPI may still be seen as ‘nice-to-have’ rather than a fundamen-
tal part of healthcare provision.50
Collective patient and public involvement as part of major
system changes
Engaging patients on a collective level refers to patients participating
Box 2 Clinical practice specific patient
in activities where the impact extends beyond their own care.7This
and public involvement considerations
shift that places patients at the centre of healthcare (person-
centred care) has occurred partly in recognition that they provide
Minimum standards
a unique insight into (their own) care delivery, and partly due to
the findings of reports investigating serious failings in clinical (1) Individual patient care: Collaborative partnerships should be es-
care.36,37 Engagement of PPI on a collective level is also varied
tablished between healthcare professionals, patients, and po-
but may include contributing to a review and redesign of services,
tentially family members, to achieve informed or shared
providing expert input into resource allocation discussions, or lead-
decision-making and deliver personalized care.
ing patient safety and quality processes. Nevertheless, while the fo-
cus of an intervention may be strategic, the intrinsic value to (2) System changes: Patients and the public should be partners in
patients of participating in a process of change is equally valuable.38 major system change plans and policy development from prior-
Consequently, the concept of value can be taken into account when ity setting to dissemination. For example, this includes partners
evaluating the benefit of engagement.38The intensity of this engage- the redesign of healthcare services (such as specialized clinics)
ment can be measured along a continuum from consultation where
and quality improvement processes.
feedback is given, to involvement where patients advice is sought, to
Considerations for implementation
partnership and shared leadership where patients are collaborating
with clinicians as equals to deliver a project.39Collective PPI is com-
(1) To achieve the full potential of PPI, it must be adopted as an in-
plex but five ‘simple rules’ have been defined to underpin successful
tegral part of healthcare policy and quality improvement. This
initiatives and include: style of leadership; development of feedback
requires a cultural shift and practice redesign with partnerships
loops; learning from past experience; engagement of physicians; and
inclusion of patients and families.40An example of a specific health- being a crucial aspect of high-quality, person-centred care.
care service design is the concept of nurse-led clinics. In such design (2) Patient and public involvement approaches should focus on the
it is crucial that the values of patients and healthcare professionals context, adapting to culture and local community, particularly in
are covenant and non-conflicting for the engagement to be effect- low- and middle-income countries, where PPI may be challen-
ive.35 It is therefore essential that clinicians are clear of their goal
ging due to structural and financial barriers.
for the PPI activity and the programme is subsequently designed
in a way that makes achieving the goal realistic. Community engage-
ment strategies (e.g. home visits, engagement of churches, or local
physicians) have been helpful in overcoming challenges to deliver
Patient and public involvement in research
care but also demonstrated to be successful strategies for recruitment
and retention, especially in under-represented communities.41,42 When considering PPI in research, most emphasis is placed on PPI in
Notably, greater PPI may entail an improved merge of those parts designing, delivering, and disseminating research for individual projects
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

6 J . M . H e n d r ik s e t a l.
(Graphical Abstract). Beyond this, PPI has a considerable contribution to therefore, funding organizations have a responsibility to both recog-
make to the wider research system in defining research priorities, grant nize but also appropriately fund PPI. Certainly, some research funding
review and funding policies, ethics committees, co-authorship, and edi- bodies (e.g. NIHR in UK, CHIR in Canada) mandate and fund PPI ac-
torial policies and procedures. tivity within grants, although others (e.g. NIH in USA) do not explicitly
state this.
Patients and the public as grant reviewers are increasingly com-
Patient and public involvement in research studies mon.69 Pre-grant submission feedback leads to the adoption of al-
Patient involvement in research is typically termed PPI in the UK, most 40% of the patient advice to improve proposals.70 In some
community-based participatory research (CBPR) in the USA and instances post-submission patient reviews are incorporated into
Canada while co-design and consensus methods are also methodo- the overall review panel process while in others PPI review is consid-
logical designs that include patient and/or public involvement ered separately. Roles include ranking on priority of shortlisted sci-
(Table 1). Whilst these concepts are similar in philosophy, differ- entific reviews,71 although others are more detailed asking PPI
ences do exist: PPI and co-design includes patient involvement reviewers to consider if the methods are appropriate for patients,
from planning to dissemination, consensus methods are more likely if the PPI plans throughout the proposal are well defined and if the
to apply to individual aspects of the research while CBPR tends to funding for related PPI activities is sufficient.72 However, overall,
engage communities in delivering the research rather than other as- there is a lack of international best practice guidance on how best
pects of the research process.51 Although the effectiveness of co- to attain meaningful patient involvement in grant reviewing and grant
design is rarely evaluated,52PPI improves the quality of the research panels. Suggestions for improvement have included training and edu-
design, recruitment, interpretation and communication of re- cation for researchers and committees; aligning perspectives of the
sults53while CBPR enhances recruitment and outcomes.51,54–56 funding bodies and patient perspectives on researcher expectations
Despite this, researchers often have limited awareness, knowledge and making it mandatory for researchers to include how patient’s ad-
and skills of PPI and have concerns regarding ethical considerations vice was incorporated.70
and oversight of PPI activities.57Although the reporting of PPI is lim-
ited in LMIC, PPI mostly occurs in research planning contributing to
improved study design and relevance to the community9 An area Editorial policies and co-authorship
where PPI would be particularly beneficial is in the contextualization There has been a considerable increase in patient authored and
of international research for LMIC.18However, PPI in research is not co-authored papers on PubMed in recent years, with a 9-fold in-
without challenges. Maintaining relationships over time, lack of re- crease observed from 2020 to 2021.73Most health journals com-
sources to support effective engagement, the burden on patients de- ply with the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors
pendent on their condition58and lack of training for both patients (ICMJE) which provide standards for authorship, although guide-
and researchers59are particular difficulties. Therefore, training, ap- lines for patient co-authors are not specifically defined. Such
propriate planning and resources in terms of e.g. time and finances, guidelines may describe the specific contributions of patient co-
must be supported by funding bodies for effective PPI in research. authors, their potential need of support, and the associated
There is a growing bank of tools to support PPI in research. prerequisites for the authorship team. Within the ICMJE the re-
Ethical frameworks for involving patients in research design60 pay- sponsibility rests collectively with the authorship team to ensure
ment frameworks61 the establishment of core PPI organisational all authors meet the required criteria. In contrast, the recently up-
groups (e.g. the International Core Outcome Measurement in dated Good Publication Practice for company sponsored biomed-
Effectiveness Trials (COMET), People and Patient Participation ical research have added, that authorship criteria should be applied
Involvement and Engagement working group to support patient in- consistently to all contributors, including patients.74At the medic-
volvement in designing core outcome sets) and reporting guidelines al journal level the majority (69.2%) of Editors-in-Chief believe it is
for PPI in research62are all now available. acceptable for patients to be authors or co-authors, but a third did
not75 highlighting an inconsistency across journals. Furthermore,
only 3.6% had a policy on how patient partners should be consid-
Defining research priorities ered as co-authors.75 Additionally, the BMJ have included PPI in
Defining research priorities is important addressing health need their peer-review process, as part of their commitment to co-
gaps but also for focusing the use of limited resources63and redu- produce content and enhance the relevance and patient centred-
cing research waste.10 Strategies to address this include ensuring ness of their papers.76
research is focused on patient-centredness and tackling patient- The adoption of the Guidance for Reporting Involvement of
defined research priorities,10 where uncertainties in the evidence Patients and the Public in health and social care research
exist.16 This can be at research group, organizational, national, (GRIPP and GRIPP-2),62,77 to improve PPI reporting in research
or international level. In CVD examples of patient and public part- has been slow. However, some journals, for example, The BMJ
nerships in setting national research priorities include advanced journals, have started to require all authors to include a PPI state-
heart failure,64 congenital heart disease,65 heart surgery,66 cardio- ment in the methods section. Editorial policies are also expanding
vascular prevention and rehabilitation67 in the UK, and aortic dis- to include patient-specific resources. From a cardiovascular per-
section in Sweden.68 However, the involvement of PPI in priority spective, the ESC produces guidelines for patients and The
setting is not internationally applied and should become universally European Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing has patient representa-
adopted. tion on its editorial board and commissions patient perspective
articles written by patients. This ‘Science for Patient’ section
aims to describe and translate findings from reviews into plan
Grants and funding bodies (panels and reviews) English to support patients and the public to understand the re-
As highlighted previously, while PPI has demonstrated to improve the search. An area of ongoing contention across all specialities is
quality of research and outcomes, effective PPI is commonly chal- equity of access to published papers and open access policies,
lenged by time and financial resource. Patient involvement should which often restrict patients without an academic affiliation
be financially supported equivalent to other included experts2 and from accessing papers.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

Patient and public involvement in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease 7
financially supported for their work.79 Involvement activities are not
Box 3 Research-specific patient and standardized and include an array of undertakings—steering, advisory
and review panels, operational committees, providing advice on out-
public involvement considerations
comes important to patients (including patient-reported outcomes), pri-
Minimum standards ority setting and patient-led collaborations, to name a few. Key regulatory
authorities including the FDA,80UK Medicines and Healthcare Products
(1) Patient and public involvement must be embedded in the entire Regulatory Agency81and the EMA8now have established strategies or
research system, from identification of priorities (local, national, frameworks for patient involvement. Additionally, The European
and international), the design and planning of research, the im- Patients’ Academy on Therapeutic Innovation, a pan-European public–
private partnership program of the European Patients’ Forum, has pub-
plementation (including data collection, analysis, and interpret-
lished guidance for PPI in four regulatory areas: pharmaceutical
ation, as appropriate) and the dissemination of findings. This
industry-led medicine in research and development (R and D), ethics
includes the use of patient researchers, where appropriate. committee, regulatory authorities and health technology assessments.82
(2) Funding organizations should align funding calls to research pri- Despite these advancements, many other regulatory bodies still under-
orities identified through PPI, mandate the inclusion of PPI in all value PPI and are at different stages of strategy development.83
grant applications (including how the PPI has informed the pro-
posal) and patients and the public should be equal partners in
grant review panels, Budget allowance, equitable with technical
Box 4 Regulatory-specific patient and
expertise, specific for PPI expertise and activities should be
public involvement considerations
included.
(3) All research committees, at all levels should include PPI partners Minimum standards
across the entire research process.
(1) Regulatory bodies must work in partnership with patients, en-
(4) Editorial boards of journals and publications should have PPI
suring that roles and responsibilities are clearly defined, contri-
membership and should accept, and expect, patient co-authors
butions formally recognized, and participation supported
in line with ICJME requirements. Patient and public involvement
through appropriate financial reimbursement. Involvement
partners should also be part of the peer-review process.
should extend the regulatory continuum, including steering
(5) Tailored training should be provided for PPI partners to build
and advisory committees, operational working groups, priority
confidence and understanding of the research process, and at
setting, patient-led collaborations, and the co-development of
the same time researchers should be trained on how to conduct
patient-reported outcome measures.
effective PPI as a core research competency.
Considerations for implementation
Considerations for implementation
(1) Establishing best practice frameworks and training to support
(1) For effective PPI establishing best practice frameworks, guides
consistent, high-quality PPI across regulatory activities.
and policies for the inclusion of patient and public partners in
Regulatory bodies have a role in setting the standard for re-
research (including research development, funding organiza-
search requirements and thus could influence and drive require-
tions, and editorial boards and processes) should be established
ments for transparent and active PPI in research.
to aid practice and provide transparency.
(2) Allocate resources and develop evaluation mechanisms to
(2) Creating safe spaces for patient and public partners where re-
embed PPI within routine practice and to assess its impact on
spectful, inclusive and equitable engagement is key for PPI mem-
regulatory decision-making.
bers to feel valued and listened to. Training for both PPI
(3) Collaborate nationally and internationally to align standards,
partners and staff should be developed and provided in all sec-
share learning, and set expectations for PPI across regulation
tors of research regarding PPI policies and inclusion.
settings.
(3) Opportunities for PPI activities should be generated from the
appropriate PPI community. Such activities may include provid-
ing lay summaries, patient-led grant calls or publications, PPI Patient and public involvement in policy
perspectives suggested for all grant and paper submissions or
and clinical guideline development
patient-perspectives in journals, as potential examples.
Given the consensus that PPI in policy-making is important, and that
International standards do exist for the integration of PPI in policy and clin-
ical practice guideline development,84evidence of actionable patient in-
Patient and public involvement in volvement is sparse and underdeveloped. A review of 101 US-based
guideline developing organizations identified only 8% required patients
regulatory organizations
on development groups, only 24% sought public comment on draft guide-
The inclusion of patients in all aspects of medicine regulation has come lines and only 20% created patient-specific guideline outputs (e.g. patient
more into focus in recent years. It was in the early 1990s that the first summaries).85 Conversely, Brazil has noted public consultation and in-
patient representative served on an US Food and Drug Administration creased patient participation in public health initiatives led to almost four
(FDA) advisory committee, with them receiving voting rights in 1996.78 times more initiatives being amended from their initial recommendation.86
It is now more widely recognized that patients bring considerable bene- The National Institute for health and Care Excellence (NICE), which
fit to the regulatory scientific process, that regulation bodies need to develops UK national clinical guidance, advice and standards, has a PPI
work in partnership with patients, that roles and contributions of pa- policy87 and details PPI roles such as direct involvement in guidance
tient partners should be defined, and that patients are appropriately production and quality standards as formal members of committees
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

8 J . M . H e n d r ik s e t a l.
and indirectly through reviewing scopes, draft recommendation and by
submitting evidence.87Likewise, NHS England, who lead the health service (2) Provide training and support for both patients and profes-
sionals, embedding PPI from the earliest stages of development
in England, highlight roles in governance (open Board meetings, open an-
nual general meetings, and representatives on committees, working with structured feedback on contributions.
groups and programme boards), NHS Citizenship (dialogue to influence (3) Establish long-term commitment to PPI by evaluating its impact
priorities and decision-making), and partnership working with different and process to ensure inclusivity, effectiveness, and
communities and the voluntary sector.7 Specifically in CVD, the ESC
accountability.
has ESC Patient Forum members on every Guidelines Task Force, patient
advocates are involved in guideline review, and patient versions of the
guidelines are produced. Overall, key areas for consideration as a lack
of a standardized approach to PPI in clinical practice guideline develop- Equity, diversity, and inclusion in
ment, varying terminology of ‘PPI’ is used which hinders understanding
patient and public involvement
of their contribution and a lack of reporting of PPI involvement in some
areas of clinical practice guideline development.88 Challenges have also
The benefits of PPI in research have been demonstrated predominantly
been reported in producing patient versions notably working with volun-
in HIC. However, there is often an imbalance of patient participation in
teers, the lack of consultation, financial resources, and difficulties in trans-
favour of white males.90Thus, positive efforts to recruit women, mem-
lating the recommendations into patient-level information with calls for
bers of Black, Asian and minority ethnic groups, those from lower
greater transparency of methods, and consideration of appropriate dis-
semination of patient versions to reach the target audience.89 socioeconomic groups, and other under-represented communities is
required. Efforts to address this have been made with the NIHR man-
While policy and clinical practice guideline organizations have tended to
dating the consideration of inclusion and reducing health inequalities a
focus on the PPI role, some attention has been given to defining the ex-
requirement for funding proposals, ensuring future research considers
pectations of international, national, and regional senior teams ensuring
inclusion and equity.7
the adoption and execution of PPI in service and policy development.
Across LMIC several challenges exist that serve to obstruct inclusion
The WHO framework for meaningful engagement specifically targets
implementation.18 These challenges include gaps in health infrastruc-
World Health Organisation and Member States including senior manage-
ture, low socioeconomic status, cultural stigma, and uncertain roles.
ment and programme directors, ministers of health and their advisors,
Strategies to enhance patient mobilization, leveraging existing partner-
health sector planning managers and resource and administrative advi-
sors.2 Similarly, the NHS England (NHSE) Patient and Public ships for increase financial support, the use of peer-to-peer partner-
ships either locally, nationally, or internationally, and to increase
Participation policy highlights the corporate responsibilities of the
education addressing the role of patients and public in research as strat-
Board of NHSE, the chairman and non-executive directors, the chief nurs-
egies to address challenges with PPI in research in LMIC is needed.18
ing officer, regional directors, and all managers while also acknowledging
that all staff are responsible for considering the need for PPI in their work.7 Patient-led organizations have primarily been created for the sole
purpose of patient advocacy. While varied in structure, scope and im-
What is required is evaluation of these policies to ascertain the progress
plementation methods, all have the same goal—to advocate and pro-
made in PPI becoming routinely embedded in policy development.
vide a voice for the lived experience in clinical service development,
research, and health policy.91 In CVD, examples include the Global
Heart Hub.
Box 5 Policy-specific patient and public A very good example of involvement in CVD prevention is the re-
cently issued manifesto, advocating for cardiovascular health, by the
involvement considerations
Global Heart Hub, that outlines key actions on eight areas: public infor-
Minimum standards mation, early disease detection, efficient testing, digital access, health
professionals training, research investment, and policy guidance and
(1) Patient and public involvement is essential to ensure that health equity access (Global Heart Hub, 2024). Each key action states a clear
policies and clinical guidelines are patient-centred and relevant view of the need for that action with some tips on how to do it. This
to patient needs. Certain principles can guide PPI herein: (i) shows how patients can have a global impact on CVD.
Standardized definition of PPI and approach to integrated into
policy development at national and international level; (ii)
Follow national and international standards on PPI integration Discussion and future directions
at all levels, in which roles, expectations, responsibilities, and re-
The importance of meaningful PPI is evolving at pace, although cardio-
imbursement have been outlined; (iii) Include the roles and re-
vascular care throughout Europe has been slower to respond. ACNAP
sponsibilities of PPI in the job descriptions of all senior team
and the ESC Patient Forum strongly advocate for the value and integra-
members (e.g. Chief Executives, Board chairs, and members); tion of PPI within clinical, research, regulation, and policy. This state-
(iii) Include PPI in prioritizing health services development and ment not only highlights examples of good practice in these settings
implementation as well as associated policies; (iv) Consult PPI and provides a definition of PPI tailored to the cardiovascular field
during policy and guideline development, and produce access- but also forms a foundation on which ACNAP and the ESC patient for-
um believe current and future activities should be built. As highlighted
ible patient versions of all policies, clinical guidelines, and stan-
previously, much of the existing work is from the UK which has been
dards; (v) Establish best practice frameworks to provide
trailblazing on the integration of PPI partnerships, especially within re-
guidance in PPI involvement and associated benefits.
search. However, while the UK provides the majority of the existing
Considerations for implementation and implementation evidence, this leads to an inequity across Europe.
Since patients are at the heart of the ESC’s mission of reducing the bur-
(1) Establish mechanisms for PPI within policy and guideline devel-
den of CVD, ACNAP and the ESC patient forum are committed to ad-
opment, ensuring diverse representation, clear roles, arrange- dressing this equity-gap by proposing evidence-based opportunities
ments for reimbursement, and accessible communication. for integrated, purposeful, and meaningful PPI across all aspects of
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

Patient and public involvement in the management and prevention of cardiovascular disease 9
cardiovascular care, across all specialisms and professions, to be imple- 13.Haerry D, Brooke N, Dutarte M, Geissler J, Bertelsen N. The evolving practice of patient
mented across Europe and beyond. This will not only strengthen the and public involvement in Europe and the United States 2021. 
quality, relevance and utility of work undertaken but also strive for equi- ch/en/publications/ra-watch/ra-watch-6-n-ppi/deep-dive-2-ppi-abroad-a-patient-advoca
cy-perspective-121.html.
ty of patient partnerships, which are distinctly lacking in many countries.
14.NHS England. Framework for patients and public participation in public health commis-
These opportunities not only allow for standardization but also support
sioning 2017. 
the advancement of future visions of healthcare, particularly in areas frmwrk.pdf.
where public scepticism may exist. For example, the rapid growth of 15.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Patient and public involvement
artificial intelligence in healthcare highlights the importance of PPI policy. 
both in building trust92 and in the understanding the acceptability of involvement/patient-and-public-involvement-policy.
it use.93 Therefore, this statement can be used to establish the core 16.The James Lind Alliance. The James Lind Alliance 2025. 
17.National Institute for Health and Care Research. UK standards for public involvement.
foundations in terms of recognizing the value of PPI, embedding a PPI

culture, defining principles for practice, while also creating environ- 18.Janic A, Kimani K, Olembo I, Dimaras H. Lessons for patient engagement in research in
ments that encourage and support PPI. These elements are key to im- low- and middle-income countries. Ophthalmol Ther 2020;9:221–229.
pactful care delivery, research, regulation, and policy in settings where 19.Tritter JQ. Revolution or evolution: the challenges of conceptualizing patient and public
growth is needed and that aims to address the global CVD burden. involvement in a consumerist world. Health Expect 2009;12:275–287.
20.NHS Health Research Authority. Public involvement. 
and-improving-research/best-practice/public-involvement/.
Supplementary material 21.National Institute for Health and Care Research. Briefing notes for researchers - public
involvement in NHS, health and social care research 2021. 
briefing-notes-researchers-public-involvement-nhs-health-and-social-care-research.
Supplementary material is available at European Journal of Cardiovascular
22.National Co-ordinating Centre for Public Engagement. Introducing public engagement
Nursingonline.
2025. 
23.PARADIGM. Patients active in research and dialogues for an improved generation of
Funding medicines 2020. 
24.Ski CF, Cartledge S, Foldager D, Thompson DR, Fredericks S, Ekman I, et al. Integrated
No funding was received for this work. J.S., Senior Clinical Practitioner care in cardiovascular disease: a statement of the Association of Cardiovascular Nursing
Researcher NIHR304448, is funded by the National Institute for Health and Allied Professions of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs
and Care Research for this research project. The views expressed in this 2023;22:e39–e46.
publication are those of the author and not necessarily those of the 25.Candelaria D, Tyagi V, Gallagher R, Hendriks J, McCormack B. Person-centredness in
cardiovascular care: the need for a whole-systems perspective. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs
National Institute for Health and Care Research, NHS or the UK
2024;23:e161–e163.
Department of Health and Social Care.
26.Luxford K, Newell S. New South Wales mounts “patient based care” challenge. BMJ
Conflict of interest: None declared. 2015;350:g7582.
27.O’Rourke M. The Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care Agenda
for Improvement and Implementation. Asia Pac J Health Manag 2007;2:21–25.
Data availability 28.Dennison Himmelfarb CR, Beckie TM, Allen LA, Commodore-Mensah Y, Davidson PM,
Lin G, et al. Shared decision-making and cardiovascular health: a scientific statement
The data that support this article are available in the article.
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2023;148:912–931.
29.Childress JF, Childress MD. What does the evolution from informed consent to shared
References decision making teach US about authority in health care? AMA J Ethics 2020;22:
E423–E429.
1.World Health Organization. Nothing for us, without us: opportunities for meaningful en-
30.Nunes JC, Baykaner T, Pundi K, DeSutter K, Hills T, Mahaffey M, et al. Design and de-
gagement of people living with NCDs 2021. 
velopment of a digital shared decision-making tool for stroke prevention in atrial fibril-
nothing-for-us-without-us-opportunities-for-meaningful-engagement-of-people-living-
with-ncds. lation. JAMIA Open 2023;6:ooad003.
2.World Health Organization. WHO framework for meaningful engagement of people 31.Stacey D, Lewis KB, Smith M, Carley M, Volk R, Douglas EE, et al. Decision aids for people
living with noncommunicable diseases, and mental health and neurological conditions facing health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2024;1:
2023,  CD001431.
3.Cesare D, Perel M, Taylor P, Kabudula S, Bixby C, Gaziano H, et al. The heart of the 32.Pel-Littel RE, Snaterse M, Teppich NM, Buurman BM, van Etten-Jamaludin FS, van
world. Glob Heart 2024;19:11. Weert JCM, et al. Barriers and facilitators for shared decision making in older patients
4.Roth GA, Mensah GA, CO J, Addolorato G, Ammirati E, Baddour LM, et al. Global bur- with multiple chronic conditions: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr 2021;21:112.
den of cardiovascular diseases and risk factors, 1990–2019: update from the GBD 2019 33.Mehawej J, Saczynski J, Abu HO, Gagnier M, Bamgbade BA, Lessard D, et al. Factors as-
study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;76:2982–3021. sociated with patient engagement in shared decision-making for stroke prevention
5.World Heart Federation. World Heart Report 2023 - Confronting the world’s number among older adults with atrial fibrillation. Can Geriatr J 2021;24:174–183.
one killer 2023.  34.Ferguson C, Hendriks J. Partnering with patients in shared decision-making for stroke
Report-2023.pdf. prevention in atrial fibrillation. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2017;16:178–180.
6.Kaptoge S, Pennells L, De Bacquer D, Cooney MT, Kavousi M, Stevens G, et al. World 35.Eldh AC, Ehnfors M, Ekman I. The meaning of patient participation for patients and
Health Organization cardiovascular disease risk charts: revised models to estimate risk nurses at a nurse-led clinic for chronic heart failure. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2006;5:
in 21 global regions. Lancet Glob Health 2019;7:e1332–e1345. 45–53.
7.Malfait S, Van Hecke A, De Bodt G, Palsterman N, Eeckloo K. Patient and public involve- 36.The Bristol Royal Infirmatory Inquiry. Learning from Bristol - the report of the public
ment in hospital policy-making: identifying key elements for effective participation. inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmatory 1984-1995 2001.
Health Policy 2018;122:380–388. 
8.Silva I, Gabrielli G, Garcia Burgos J, Moulon I, Calvo Rojas G, Jaeger U, et al. A decade of 37.Maher S. The Francis report –the importance of person-centred health and care. Dent
collaboration in medicines regulation: healthcare professionals engaging with the Update 2015;42:210–212.
European Medicines Agency. Front Med (Lausanne) 2024;11:1399947. 38.McKevitt C, Ramsay AIG, Perry C, Turner SJ, Boaden R, Wolfe CDA, et al. Patient, carer
9.Cook N, Siddiqi N, Twiddy M, Kenyon R. Patient and public involvement in health re- and public involvement in major system change in acute stroke services: the construc-
search in low and middle-income countries: a systematic review. BMJ Open 2019;9: tion of value. Health Expect 2018;21:685–692.
e026514. 39.Carman KL, Dardess P, Maurer M, Sofaer S, Adams K, Bechtel C, et al. Patient and family
10.Ioannidis JPA. Why most clinical research is not useful. PLoS Med 2016;13:e1002049. engagement: a framework for understanding the elements and developing interventions
11.Barham L. Public and patient involvement at the UK National Institute for Health and and policies. Health Aff (Millwood) 2013;32:223–231.
Clinical Excellence. Patient 2011;4:1–10. 40.Best A, Greenhalgh T, Lewis S, Saul JE, Carroll S, Bitz J. Large-system transformation in
12.World Health Organization. Report of the International Conference on Primary Health health care: a realist review. Milbank Q 2012;90:421–456.
Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6–12 September 1978 1978.  41.Gorelick PB. Community engagement: lessons learned from the AAASPS and SDBA.
i/item/9241800011. Stroke 2022;53:654–662.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026

10 J . M . H e n d r ik s e t a l.
42.Klompstra L, Stromberg A, Jaarsma T, Hendriks JM. Challenges and strategies for effect- cardiac surgery: a report from the James Lind Alliance Priority Setting Partnership in
ive recruitment and retention of participants in clinical research studies. Eur J Cardiovasc adult heart surgery. BMJ Open 2020;10:e038001.
Nurs 2025;24:808–812. 67.McHale S, Cowie A, Brown S, Butler T, Carver K, Dalal HM, et al. Research priorities
43.Thomson R, Murtagh M, Khaw FM. Tensions in public health policy: patient engagement, relating to the delivery of cardiovascular prevention and rehabilitation programmes: re-
evidence-based public health and health inequalities. Qual Saf Health Care 2005;14:398–400. sults of a modified Delphi process. Open Heart 2023;10:e002248.
44.Westerink HJ, Oirbans T, Garvelink MM, van Uden-Kraan CF, Zouitni O, Bart HAJ, et al. 68.Acosta S, Kumlien C, Forsberg A, Nilsson J, Ingemansson R, Gottsater A. Engaging pa-
Barriers and facilitators of meaningful patient participation at the collective level in tients and caregivers in establishing research priorities for aortic dissection. SAGE Open
healthcare organizations: a systematic review. Health Policy 2023;138:104946. Med 2019;7:2050312118822632.
45.Australian Government. Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care 69.Frank L, Forsythe L, Ellis L, Schrandt S, Sheridan S, Gerson J, et al. Conceptual and prac-
2017.  tical foundations of patient engagement in research at the patient-centered outcomes
46.Parliament of the United Kingdom. National Health Service Act 2006 2006. https:// research institute. Qual Life Res 2015;24:1033–1041.
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/41. 70.Vroonland E, Schalkers I, Bloemkolk D, Dedding C. Patient involvement in cardiovascu-
47.Spatz ES, Elwyn G, Moulton BW, Volk RJ, Frosch DL. Shared decision making as part of lar research: a qualitative impact evaluation. Res Involv Engagem 2019;5:29.
value based care: new U.S. policies challenge our readiness. Z Evid Fortbild Qual 71.Rittenbach K, Horne CG, O’Riordan T, Bichel A, Mitchell N, Fernandez Parra AM, et al.
Gesundhwes 2017;123–124:104–108. Engaging people with lived experience in the grant review process. BMC Med Ethics
48.Act R. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 2019;20:95.
Services. 2013.  72.National Institute for Health and Care Research. Guidance for completing a review task
49.Chung MK, Fagerlin A, Wang PJ, Ajayi TB, Allen LA, Baykaner T, et al. Shared decision (public contributors) 2019. 
making in cardiac electrophysiology procedures and arrhythmia management. Circ public-contributors.
Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2021;14:e007958. 73.Oliver J, Lobban D, Dormer L, Walker J, Stephens R, Woolley K. Hidden in plain sight?
50.Doble E, Barone M. Co-creating healthcare. BMJ 2023;382:1820. Identifying patient-authored publications. Res Involv Engagem 2022;8:12.
51.Yang J, Park B. A scoping review key elements and effects of cardiovascular disease man- 74.DeTora LM, Toroser D, Sykes A, Vanderlinden C, Plunkett FJ, Lane T, et al. Good pub-
agement programs based on community-based participatory research. PLoS One 2023; lication practice (GPP) guidelines for company-sponsored biomedical research: 2022
18:e0279563. update. Ann Intern Med 2022;175:1298–1304.
52.Slattery P, Saeri AK, Bragge P. Research co-design in health: a rapid overview of reviews. 75.Cobey KD, Monfaredi Z, Poole E, Proulx L, Fergusson D, Moher D. Editors-in-chief per-
Health Res Policy Syst 2020;18:17. ceptions of patients as (co) authors on publications and the acceptability of ICMJE
53.South A, Hanley B, Gafos M, Cromarty B, Stephens R, Sturgeon K, et al. Models and im- authorship criteria: a cross-sectional survey. Res Involv Engagem 2021;7:39.
pact of patient and public involvement in studies carried out by the Medical Research 76.Richards T, Snow R, Schroter S. Logging the BMJ’s “patient journey”. BMJ 2015;351:h4396.
Council Clinical Trials Unit at University College London: findings from ten case studies. 77.Staniszewska S, Brett J, Mockford C, Barber R. The GRIPP checklist: strengthening the
Trials 2016;17:376. quality of patient and public involvement reporting in research. Int J Technol Assess
54.Balcazar H, Rosenthal L, De Heer H, Aguirre M, Flores L, Vasquez E, et al. Use of Health Care 2011;27:391–399.
community-based participatory research to disseminate baseline results from a cardio- 78.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Evolution of patient engagement at the FDA 2024.
vascular disease randomized community trial for Mexican Americans living in a 
U.S.-Mexico border community. Educ Health (Abingdon) 2009;22:279. 79.European Medicines Agency. Reflection paper on the further involvement of patients
55.Kitzman H, Dodgen L, Mamun A, Slater JL, King G, Slater D, et al. Community-based and consumers in the agency’s activities 2009. 
participatory research to design a faith-enhanced diabetes prevention program: the bet- files/documents/other/wc500038080_en.pdf.
ter me within randomized trial. Contemp Clin Trials 2017;62:77–90. 80.U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Learn about FDA patient engagement 2024. https://
56.Chimberengwa PT, Naidoo M. Using community-based participatory research in im- www.fda.gov/patients/learn-about-fda-patient-engagement.
proving the management of hypertension in communities: a scoping review. S Afr Fam 81.Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Patient involvement strategy
Pract (2004) 2020;62:e1–e14. 2021-25 2021. 
57.Kaisler RE, Kulnik ST, Klager E, Kletecka-Pulker M, Schaden E, Stainer-Hochgatterer A. strategy/patient-involvement-strategy-2021-25.
Introducing patient and public involvement practices to healthcare research in Austria: 82.Haerry D, Landgraf C, Warner K, Hunter A, Klingmann I, May M, et al. EUPATI and pa-
strategies to promote change at multiple levels. BMJ Open 2021;11:e045618. tients in medicines research and development: guidance for patient involvement in regu-
58.National Institute for Health and Care Research. NIHR Researchfish 2023 Update 2023. latory processes. Front Med (Lausanne) 2018;5:230.
 83.Campbell B, Sedrakyan A. Patient involvement in regulation: an unvalued imperative.
59.Agyei-Manu E, Atkins N, Lee B, Rostron J, Dozier M, Smith M, et al. The benefits, chal- Lancet 2021;397:2147–2148.
lenges, and best practice for patient and public involvement in evidence synthesis: a sys- 84.Qaseem A, Forland F, Macbeth F, Ollenschlager G, Phillips S, van der Wees P, et al.
tematic review and thematic synthesis. Health Expect 2023;26:1436–1452. Guidelines International Network: toward international standards for clinical practice
60.Pandya-Wood R, Barron DS, Elliott J. A framework for public involvement at the design guidelines. Ann Intern Med 2012;156:525–531.
stage of NHS health and social care research: time to develop ethically conscious stan- 85.Armstrong MJ, Bloom JA. Patient involvement in guidelines is poor five years after institute
dards. Res Involv Engagem 2017;3:6. of medicine standards: review of guideline methodologies. Res Involv Engagem 2017;3:19.
61.National Institute for Health and Care Research. Payment guidance for researchers and pro- 86.De Freitas Lopes AC, Novaes HMD, De Soarez PC. Does patient and public involve-
fessionals 2024.  ment impact public health decision-making? A 10 year retrospective analysis of public
62.Staniszewska S, Brett J, Simera I, Seers K, Mockford C, Goodlad S, et al. GRIPP2 report- consultation in Brazil. Health Res Policy Syst 2023;21:72.
ing checklists: tools to improve reporting of patient and public involvement in research. 87.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Patient and public involvement
BMJ 2017;358:j3453. policy 2013. 
63.Stewart R, Oliver S. A systematic map of studies of patients’ and clinicians’ research involvement/Patient-and-public-involvement-policy/Patient-and-public-involvement-
priorities. 2008.  policy-November-2013.pdf.
of_Studies_of_Patients_20160726-479-f353lt-libre.pdf?1469527280=&response- 88.Bryant EA, Scott AM, Greenwood H, Thomas R. Patient and public involvement in
contentdisposition=inline%3B+filename%3DA_Systematic_Map_of_Studies_of_ the development of clinical practice guidelines: a scoping review. BMJ Open 2022;
Patients.pdf&Expires=1759951395&Signature=URRwgOavE1–XR7gdXVzuFYoa6bBg0 12:e055428.
dbjrxFMKaW∼FIwf9pS5CLWGz45QaQdZIUgPUug28gnSR4i55-NNa2znDQq3NYwY 89.Meyer N, Hauprich J, Breuing J, Hellbrecht I, Wahlen S, Konsgen N, et al. Barriers and facil-
dQs6gcRBz1kg1FzutKkE9BqHswLa6sKguGSSSVqd2LOlbxDvbMAyELvf∼F8kcxYckJI∼ itators in developing patient versions of clinical practice guidelines - qualitative interviews on
BzoXLHgk7PUSh8fmoOwWabj5∼llua2ATlQaolC8AeUsUIY9-Ny4pa∼6ngDsVXBN experiences of international guideline producers. BMC Health Serv Res 2024;24:78.
Rn5ATXqqrxiDhM7G52rT6EsQjPyIjlIBmfCPptcRGZ8H0YPktbatqSZq3oP4∼gOtq6 90.Gorman R, Davies G. When ‘cultures of care’ meet: entanglements and accountabilities
kLU7BtL00sVrAJRtiLtp48∼Jglx64mvg9QQznMn2JLjrfaVd8BWw__&Key-Pair-Id=AP at the intersection of animal research and patient involvement in the UK. Soc Cult Geogr
KAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA. 2023;24:121–139.
64.Taylor CJ, Huntley AL, Burden J, Gadoud A, Gronlund T, Jones NR, et al. Research pri- 91.Sienkiewicz D, van Lingen C, Bedlington N, Bullot C, Immonen K. On behalf of the
orities in advanced heart failure: James Lind alliance priority setting partnership. Open European Patient Forum. The added value of patient organisations 2017. https://
Heart 2020;7:e001258. www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/library/publications/epf_added_value_report_final.pdf.
65.Drury NE, Herd CP, Biglino G, Brown KL, Coats L, Cumper MJ, et al. Research priorities 92.Banerjee S, Alsop P, Jones L, Cardinal RN. Patient and public involvement to build trust in
in children and adults with congenital heart disease: a James Lind Alliance Priority Setting artificial intelligence: a framework, tools, and case studies. Patterns (N Y) 2022;3:100506.
Partnership. Open Heart 2022;9:e002147. 93.Lammons W, Silkens M, Hunter J, Shah S, Stavropoulou C. Centering public perceptions
66.Lai FY, Abbasciano RG, Tabberer B, Kumar T, Murphy GJ. Steering Group of the James on translating AI into clinical practice: patient and public involvement and engagement
Lind Alliance Heart Surgery Priority Setting Partnership. Identifying research priorities in consultation focus group study. J Med Internet Res 2023;25:e49303.
Downloaded
from

by
guest
on
22
January
2026
