An elderly man with a history of diabetes and hypertension presented with lethargy and weakness, decreased urine output, and hypotension. There was no history of GI bleeding or other hemorrhage, and no fever. He had no chest pain or shortness of breath. It was unknown whether there was a prior history of atrial fibrillation. He was on atenolol, but it was not known whether this was for hypertension or atrial fibrillation. He was not anticoagulated.
KEYWORDS: atrial, atrial fibrillation, fibrillation, ischemia, tachycardia, rvr, fibrillation rvr, subendocardial, ecg, right, leads, demand, additional, subendocardial ischemia, demand ischemia

Blood pressures ranged from 83/45 to 125/83. Heart rate ranged from 110 to 145. Initial ECG There is atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response (approximately 120 bpm). There are aberrantly conducted beats (Ashman phenomenon), which may be confused with PVC couplets. There is ST depression in V2窶天6 that is clearly ischemic. Differential Diagnosis of Ischemia New or old atrial fibrillation with posterior OMI New atrial fibrillation with RVR causing demand ischemia Old atrial fibrillation with poor rate control causing demand ischemia OMI or ACS causing subendocardial ischemia with possible additional ischemia from atrial fibrillation with RVR Hemorrhage, dehydration, sepsis, or similar causes resulting in reflexive tachycardia and demand ischemia PEARL: ST depression maximal in V1窶天4 is extremely specific for acute OMI, but not in the presence of atrial fibrillation with RVR. AI interpretation indicated that in the context of atrial fibrillation with RVR, ST depression in V1窶天4 is most likely subendocardial ischemia. This case was not OMI, but rather supply窶電emand subendocardial ischemia. Point-of-Care Ultrasound (POCUS) Assessment of volume status was performed using bedside ultrasound of the inferior vena cava (IVC). The IVC was collapsing, consistent with volume depletion. Additional views showed a small right ventricle and a small left
